Q. Can you summarize the new approach to health care at Wal-Mart?

A. The discussion we’re having internally is how you view benefits as an investment. And that’s saying if you look at an associate [Wal-Mart’s term for its employees], a total associate, and you say, if they are healthy they’ll do a better job at work, they’ll be more productive, they’ll be happier, nicer to our customers, we will have less absenteeism, our turnover will be better. All of those things have a benefit, a return to the company. So we’re really saying, instead of just trying to manage a benefit cost, we’re looking really at returns and saying we think we can impact all these other things.

Q. Before making changes this year, you surveyed workers extensively about what they want in a health care plan. What did they say?

A. They said, we want to be able to select what’s right for us. We don’t want you to — because where we were headed in the past was really to simplify, thinking it was too complicated. And what they said was, no, I don’t want you to decide; I want to have the choice and you give me, you know, help me understand what they mean so I can choose. And I want to make sure that I have that emergency everyday health care covered.

Q. What is your goal with the new plans?

A. My goal is to not move everybody to Wal-Mart’s health care plan. It’s to make sure everybody has health care that needs it. And to make sure if somebody’s choosing not to, that there’s — we can try to eliminate the reasons for them not to come onto our plan.

Q. Would you like the number of uninsured workers at Wal-Mart to hit zero? Would you like to see it 5 percent? What is a reasonable goal?

A. Obviously I’d like to see it zero. Do I think we’ll get there? No. There’s still a group of people who don’t think they need coverage. And even at $5 a month, they aren’t going to pay for it.

Q. The average Wal-Mart worker earns less than $20,000 a year, making the company’s health insurance difficult to afford. What do employees say about that?

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

A. That was part of the open enrollment question — if you’re eligible and you didn’t take Wal-Mart coverage, why? Is it because you have another source of health care or is it because I can’t afford it? Or I believe I can’t afford it. And that 10 percent [who are uninsured] were just about evenly split between, I think I can’t afford it, and I think I don’t need it.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Q. So affordability is not the major big issue that comes up in company surveys?

A. No.

Q. When you think about solving the American health care crisis what are the roles of an employer like Wal-Mart, the government and the individual worker?

A. Clearly, we need to do something differently. And I don’t believe it’s going to end up being voluntary and actually work.

In an ideal world, that would happen, but I don’t know that we can get there. We believe there is always a role for the employer, as well as the individual and the government. So it’s shared responsibility.

The question is — and that’s why I say I think everything has to be examined — is when you look at employer-based health care, I don’t know if it’s the right answer or not, but I think we need to look at it just because it happened by accident.

It wasn’t really well thought out. We’re the only country that does this. And when 40 percent of the employers can’t participate or don’t participate, maybe there’s something that’s wrong with it. But it doesn’t mean if it’s not employer-based, it doesn’t mean employers don’t contribute.

Q. What changes are required?

A. What we have constructed today almost forces the behavior that’s happening. We have a system that pays for activity, not for outcome. So a doctor loses it if he doesn’t order things to be done. And until we figure out how to structure that differently, the doctors, for the most part, don’t like it either. It drives them to — they would rather be managing somebody’s health than ordering tests. But that’s where they’re driven.

My fear is, by the way, is right now that we’re going to focus on solving the uninsured and we won’t solve the core issue, which is we’ve got to figure out the right way, the right reimbursement model that’s really focused on health and not activity. And we’ve got to figure out efficiencies.

Q. What about the role of technology in managing patient health care records?

A. I mean the lack of the technology was astounding to me. I mean absolutely astounding. And when you’ve been doing this as long as I have, it’s the stuff that already exists that’s easy to install — none of it exists in health care. I mean I always tell people our hourly associate in the store has better tools available to them on the floor than a physician has when he sees you to help you treat an illness. And that’s frightening.

Q. On a personal note, what was your reaction when Lee Scott asked you to run health care at Wal-Mart?

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A. Given my background, this really was — it wasn’t like I had this career plan and said I hope they give me risk management and health care, of which I know nothing about ... Lee, who just kind of — always comes to the heart of things — the first time I met with him after this, looked at me in the eye and said: “This is a big job. And we need you to go make a difference in health care.”