

To the Editor:

Re ''Physician, Upgrade Thyself,'' by Thomas Goetz (Op-Ed, May 30):

Having electronic medical records is a great idea and would be a step toward simplifying life for all, including the patients.

I have had some health issues lately and have seen quite a few physicians as a result. My doctor's appointment is generally scheduled for at least half an hour before my actual visit with the physician.

This allows time for the ritual of filling out information forms consisting of several pages requesting information -- some of which at my advanced age I have difficulty recalling -- about diseases I hope never to get.

If all this information were available to every hospital and physician, think of all the time we would save, and we could safely forget the date of our appendectomy.



Ursula Wertheim

Sarasota, Fla., May 30, 2007



To the Editor:

The computerized medical record, with centralized data storage, is a notion kicking around since the 1960s.

It is a na? concept whose time is not likely to come. It would make much more sense to adopt the system employed by the armed services since World War II: the individual's personal medical record travels with him.

Today it could be a memory stick carried by the potential patient. Readable in anybody's computer (with the patient's permission), the stick could carry a mass of information, including immunizations, major medical problems and the actual photos of key X-rays. And have room left over!



John M. R. Bruner, M.D.

Groton, Mass., May 30, 2007



The writer is an anesthesiologist.



To the Editor:

As a physician who has had a totally paperless office for 14 years, I can fully corroborate the value of modern information technology in the delivery of medical care.

However inexpensive VistA is, it is emphatically not a simple-to-use system and definitely not intuitive. And given its limitation on the billing and administrative side of the practice -- which for primary care physicians can run to more than half of their revenue -- it is not the answer to the need for modernizing the clinical practice of medicine.

Even if VistA were to become a de facto standard for emergency medical records, its lack of customizability would limit its usefulness.

I recently relocated from New York City to Bellingham, Wash., and in doing so changed my Medicare carrier, necessitating changing dozens of billing codes and rules for the same procedures in order to be reimbursed.

If we only had a single payer system, so that I didn't need a $40,000-per-year employee whose sole job was to get the myriad of insurance companies, each with its own documentation and payment rules, to pay $50 for an office visit.



Mitchell Kahn, M.D.

Bellingham, Wash., May 30, 2007



To the Editor:

As an engineer and software consultant to the aerospace industry, I would have expected to agree with your article. But I cannot.

I have many friends who are doctors or otherwise employed in the medical field, and the vast majority of them are computer illiterate.

Given the number of privacy breaches that have occurred from what should have been secure fields such as banking, employment and so on, I see no way I could trust my medical history to any doctor or hospital, using such online approaches to medical information.

I wish this were not true, as I appreciate what the computerized system benefits could be, but I must note that at present any such attempt would be a disaster.



Jay L. Finkelstein

Grayville, Ill., May 30, 2007



To the Editor:

Until the medical records problems are solved, I urge patients to keep their own charts.

I am lucky that my doctor communicates by e-mail. He sends a lab report as an e-mail attachment as soon as he gets it. I copy it and his e-mail reports to a Zip drive that I keep in my car glove box or purse if I am traveling or going to see a new doctor.



Catherine Coveney

Santa Barbara, Calif., May 30, 2007



Drawing (Drawing by Joel Castillo)

