Regarding Hipaa abuse, I am a lawyer from Kentucky. In 2004 when my wife and I had an insurance coverage issue, we met with the Human Resources manager at my wife's employer. The HR director said that she couldn't discuss that matter with me because it would be a violation of Hipaa. Even though I was sitting right beside my wife! -- A. Wood

Great article! I am a health care attorney. I've dealt with this issue on both sides. Years ago my grandmother had a major stroke. Doctors at the hospital and subsequently at the nursing home wouldn't tell my mother or me anything! Guess what? She died because of their lack of providing adequate and necessary medical attention. When I attempted to find out the facts- guess what? Nothing. Zero. The hospital, nursing home & HMO all said my mother and I didn't have standing to ask for any information b/c there was no power of attorney placing my mom in charge of receiving that type of information. ARGH!! That's why when I do compliance training at the company I work for, I re-enforce that some issues require a rational judgment call and when in doubt contact the legal department. Because sometimes people can't talk or communicate. Because as a health care company we can verify if our member is in the hospital and is incapable of communication or comprehension. Because if daughter Sally isn't an authorized rep - it doesn't mean mother Mary, who has had a massive heart attack and is heavily sedated, hates daughter Sally. -- A. M. Robles, Esq.

Your numerous tales could win an award for best comedy script from the Pulitzer Jury, if only they weren't so terribly true. How else could we ever understand that old saw, "We're from the Government, and we're here to help you?" I don't know what killed the Roman Empire, but I think I know what will kill this one: Bureaucracy! And the death certificate will probably have to be made out in triplicate. I can just imagine some old geezer like me (age 74) calling the local "Hospital," giving my name, and asking if I am still alive. "We can't give you that information," the bureaucrat will say. To which we patients can only reply: "First do no harm, but, if you do, make sure Hipaa keeps it under everybody's hat." -- I. N. Kaye

I'm a reporter in South Carolina for The State newspaper (in the capital, Columbia). Hipaa confusion is certainly something almost all reporters have had to contend with. The kicker of your article really made me smile.-- J. Ryan

Thank you for the article on "Keeping Patients' Details Private." I wonder whether you've looked into the way archives are responding to Hipaa? In 2003 the Society of American Archivists wrote Tommy Thompson to ask for clarification about Hipaa for historical records and researchers (a copy can be found at www.library.ucla.edu/biomed/alhhs/lettertommythompson.html). The letter was never answered and archives around the country are struggling with the issue. In my own state (I am the Archivist of Georgia) it was suggested that 100 year old death records be kept confidential because they contain cause of death which, according to some attorneys, was protected information. -- D. W. Carmicheal.

Thanks so much for your article on Hipaa. As a health care provider, I can relate to your article. I too maintain a level of privacy that approaches secrecy. Here's the context: I'm a doctor at a large multispecialty clinic. When Hipaa "hit" we had to attend a mandatory seminar in which we were scared to death! I recall the presenter telling of a four-doctor practice being bankrupted because of simple things like an illegible signature [on an outpatient chart where the treating doctor was obvious]. I also recall the threat of a $10,000 fine and five years in prison per violation. Can you blame us for playing it safe, and revealing nothing? And, once the federal government has you its cross hairs, I expect that none of the experts you cite would step up and help out. Thanks again for the nice article. I hope it causes a change in the Hipaa law. -- D. Neunaber

In January, my brother became a quadriplegic from a stroke. The shock to the family was devastating. A ventilator kept him alive. He died a month after the stroke. He decided to stop the ventilator. We knew this was a possibility and, against all odds, were trying to do whatever we could. The family's treatment at the hospital in Miami was emotional torture. First, there was the illness. Then we dealt with Hipaa, which seemed like it was designed to cause maximum emotional devastation. At first I did not even know what they were talking about. What was Hipaa? I had the unenviable position of being a sister. That really carries no weight. Everyone from the social worker to the duty nurse acted like their first job was not to be sued, and then they paid attention to health care. Like most people, when it was all over, I just wanted to go on with my life. I did not write the letters of complaint that I had composed in my head over and over again. I went home and tried to forget it all. So, thank you again for bringing to light Hipaa's horrible reality. -- L. Mitchell

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

I expect you're collecting further Hipaa stories: 1. I have a hard time remembering the names of my prescriptions, but Kaiser Permanente pharmacists refused to let me look at my very own screen on their computers, to ask for what has been prescribed to me. (Now I keep a list in my purse for this purpose.) 2. When my aunt's caregiver (Auntie is an alcoholic with dementia) went to the hospital and I was trying to decide what to do about her care I wasn't able to find out WHICH hospital or her prognosis until after her death, some five days later. I had no clue as to seriousness of the problem, and I was trying to cope from 3000 miles away, since I make medical decisions for my aunt. Thought these would add to your list. -- S. G. C.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Since its inception, I have believed Hipaa to be one of the more egregious pieces of legislation our fair Congress has enacted. This paranoid mood has gripped the country for some time, and we are headed toward fascism, in my view. It has even spilled over into education. The community college my son attends, for example, will not release his tuition bill to me, even though I am the one paying it! HIPPA is especially harmful, though, given that so often frail, elderly patients are involved, with no one to speak for them. Thank you for getting the word out there. - Name Withheld

I'd like to bring to your attention another unintended consequence of the law, which detracts from patient care. It can be very difficult for a radiologist to get clinical data and follow-up information about a patient. Examples: 1) Patient is having a M.R.I. at our imaging center. I call for a report on a prior M.R.I., done at another institution. Staff will refuse to fax it over, even though it is important to know what the prior study showed. 2) Patient is having a MRI of the knee at our imaging center. The patient has had arthroscopic surgery on that knee. I call for an operative report. Staff will refuse to fax it over. 3) Patient has a shoulder M.R.I. at our center, and has some unusual findings. The patient has surgery on the shoulder, and I call over for the operative report. By knowing what the intraoperative findings are, I improve as a radiologist, and the next time I see these findings, I will recognize them for what they are. This is one important way doctors improve over time - getting feedback on their performance. Even though I am a consultant to the referring physician, the office staff will refuse to fax me the operative report. It might be interesting to write an article on how Hipaa detracts from patient care, as a patient moves from provider to provider. As a radiologist, I have found the legislation to be nothing but a headache that detracts from my ability to provide the best possible care from my patients. -- V. David

Another misapplication of Hipaa you might want to examine is in how it's implemented regarding college students and health insurance questions. I was forced by the financial offices of a hospital system to have my then-19-year-old daughter telephone them with permission to discuss a pending balance: nothing even related to care or condition. This was even though she is still being covered as a dependent under family medical insurance and we as parents are still paying the bills. From what I've seen of Hipaa, it's a perfect example of the law of unintended consequences. Perhaps a good idea to start with, but with the devil in the details. Hipaa is an important issue that touches many lives daily. Keep up the good work in exposing its problems. -- L.P. Stewart

I read with interest your article on the inappropriate and ridiculous application of Hipaa, having had both of my parents hospitalized for lengthy periods within the past three years and having a mother with ongoing health issues. My dad spent several months in and out of the ICU at in Manhasset, Long Island. The dry erase board on which the patients' assigned nurses were listed was by room number, to "protect privacy," yet the patient names were on the doors to the rooms and doctors regularly discussed patient conditions with family in both the ICU and the ICU waiting room, with other people milling about. I more than once heard a physician tell a family that their relative basically had no hope of survival and a "decision" would have to be made. And they couldn't list the patient names on a dry erase board due to privacy concerns? Give me a break. - Name Withheld

Excellent article on the problems with Hipaa. I'm a healthcare reporter and the misapplication of the law is irritating in that sphere. But it was downright maddening when I was restricted from information by some nurses when my grandmother lay dying in the hospital and no other family members were around to attend to her. I loved the last two grafs of your story: "A hospital spokeswoman, Elena Mesa, was asked if nurses were following Hipaa protocol when they denied adult children information about their parents. She could not answer the question, Ms. Mesa said, because Hipaa prevented her from such discussions with the press." Touche. -- N. Legue

Re: Hipaa, I have had nothing but problems with getting basic information about basic things like "is my 96-year-old father there?" I ask for him in his room at St. Mary's in Santa Maria, Calif. (I'm in Georgia) and I get a nurse on the 4th or 5th ring who will not tell me if he is there. -- B. Ginn

Your article stated, "the only cases investigated...were complaints filed by patients who were denied access to their own information, the one unambigous violation of the law." As the former Chief Privacy Officer for a large health care organization, I have networked with many privacy officers from across the nation. I can affirmatively tell you that HHS has investigated health care providers for a variety of other issues. Examples include: not speaking quietly enough in a clinic lobby, making a clerical error by not updating the guarantor when a child reached the age of majority (resulting in the bill being sent to the parent), disclosing information to a young adult's mother without consent, and leaving a message on a patient's answering machine. While I agree that some health care providers have over-applied Hipaa regulations, your article seems to indicate that health care providers have no reason to fear. That's simply not the case. - N. Vogt

A few years ago, our younger daughter became psychotic and was diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder. She has a genetic condition (VCFS) that makes her prone to psychosis. When she began to recover from that bout, with her full consent and participation, we obtained guardianship. She wanted us to be able to participate in her health care (as well as manage her finances). Her group home obtained a case manager, and the case manager's agency provided a psychotherapist. After several sessions, things our daughter told us made it clear that the therapist had no clue what she was dealing with--this was not "just" a psychotic kid whose medicines had controlled her symptoms to some degree. This was a kid whose genetic disorder was like a kind of brain damage. Two or three times, when our daughter had new symptoms popping up, I called the therapist and left messages on her voice mail. I was not trying to find out personal details about whatever our daughter was telling her in therapy sessions. I was trying to GIVE her information. I reminded her that I am the guardian. I faxed her the guardianship papers. The therapist called me twice, telling me that HIPAA rules forbade her to *listen* to my messages. She said she'd be deleting them without listening to them from now on. I encouraged our daughter to keep seeing her, figuring this was at least one more way to help her structure her time (weekly visits she had to try to keep in mind and get to). After several months, the case manager (who hadn't helped with this problem) called a family meeting. The therapist needed to tell us all that she was discontinuing therapy, because nothing she told our daughter seemed to "stick" for longer than the duration of each session. Surprise! I told her (though in a nicer way). This is just exactly the sort of thing I was trying to explain to you in those voice mails! -- (Name withheld)

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

To be perfectly honest, the only way things are going to change with regard to Hipaa's "unintended conseqences" with regard to how medical professionals now misinterpret the statute is for the law to be repealed by Congress. I really do not think that anything short of that would bring communications back to some kind of normalcy. And we know that will never happen.

A lab technnician once refused to give me a copy of MY OWN lab results at a lab. where I had a lipid profile, on the grounds that it was prohibited by Hipaa. -- P. Ronai

Excellent article on Hipaa. I have had just these kind of cases: child of an elderly and sick parent cannot act as proxy for the parent because of "privacy concerns." A great example of an unintended consequence of a law and also of how lousy our health care and legal systems are set up for the care of the elderly.-- J. Karlawish