Older companies, for example, are more likely to welcome government help on coverage for workers who leave before they are eligible for Medicare and may find they cannot afford insurance. But Silicon Valley technology companies that do not have or need retiree coverage are wary of new taxpayer-financed subsidies.

The health care debate is heating up as candidates polish their positions for next year’s presidential primaries, and as Democrats in Congress assert their newfound power.

In general, employers “are more interested in reform today than at any time since the Clinton effort” in the early 1990s, said Robert S. Galvin, global health care and policy director at General Electric, which provides health benefits for 460,000 employees and dependents and 240,000 retirees and dependents.

The surge of interest, Mr. Galvin said, “is driven by compounding health cost increases at three times the general inflation rate, plus the entrance of Wal-Mart and other retailers” that are beginning to feel the pain of out-of-control increases in costs.

Wal-Mart Stores introduced lower-cost coverage for its huge work force last year, after state officials and editorial writers criticized the numbers of Wal-Mart employees on state Medicaid rolls.

Many retailers, with large staffs of low-paid, temporary and part-time workers, would welcome a larger government role.

“The way it’s going, there will be 75 million uninsured in another 10 years,” said James D. Sinegal, chief executive of Costco Wholesale, which subsidizes health care for 81,000 of its 100,000 workers in the United States. “The federal government has to lend some assistance.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Sinegal said he had agreed to support an unlikely coalition of businesses and labor unions that recently called for “achieving a new American health care system by 2012.” The group, the Better Health Care Together campaign, includes Wal-Mart, AT&T, Intel and Kelly Services, the temporary-staffing company, as well as the Service Employees International Union and the Communications Workers of America.

“The system is going to break,” warned Carl T. Camden, president and chief executive of Kelly Services. “You can only put so many uninsured people through the emergency rooms before employers stop offering coverage.”

Indeed, a bill proposed by Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, would scale back the role of employers while requiring individuals and companies to share in the costs. President Bush’s proposal would treat high-cost health care plans paid by employers as wages subject to income tax, and would also offer a new tax deduction to people who buy insurance on their own.

Economists say that employers would raise wages if they did not have to pay for employee health care. The Treasury would stand to gain $140 billion a year in personal income taxes if the benefits were treated as wages, said Len Burman, director of the nonpartisan Tax Policy Center in Washington. There would be about $70 billion more in additional payroll taxes due on those wages, he said.

But taxes would have to go up to keep the health care system functioning.

Leslie Dach, executive vice president for corporate affairs and government relations at Wal-Mart, said that the company’s “message to elected officials is: ‘The time to act is now.’ ” Mr. Dach, a public relations specialist based in Washington and a frequent adviser to Democratic presidential candidates, joined Wal-Mart last year.

While employers generally agree that steps must be taken to control health care costs, they are divided over whether or not the solutions should come from the government.

“That is the elephant in the room,” said Mr. Galvin of General Electric.

Craig R. Barrett, the chairman of Intel, another participant in the Better Health Care Together campaign, is skeptical about a new government role. He said the private sector could do the best job at improving efficiency in the system.

Corporate purchasers could use their buying power, he said, to insist on technological aids like electronic prescriptions, remote monitoring of patients with chronic illnesses and electronic health records for Americans.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Companies like General Motors argue that government agencies, which spend about half of the $2 trillion in annual health spending, should join with employers in pushing for changes to lower costs.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Working with the government as a fellow purchaser can accomplish a great deal to help improve our health care system,” said Bruce E. Bradley, director of health care strategy and public policy at G.M., which provides health care for 1.1 million people, including more than 500,000 retirees and their spouses.

Michael J. Critelli, chairman of Pitney Bowes, the business services company, says he backs changes that emphasize preventive medicine. “Any health plan, whether employer, government or private insurance needs to invest its most significant dollars in incentives for people to take good care of themselves,” he said.

He added: “The spiraling cost of health care is a result of an explosive growth in chronic diseases like diabetes, cardiovascular conditions and asthma. The health care debate needs to be focused on the core issue: making Americans healthier.”

By providing clinics, exercise and other wellness programs as well as low-cost or free drugs for certain types of patients, he said, annual cost increases for Pitney Bowes employees have fallen into the low single digits over the last 15 years. That is well below the double-digit percentage increases that many companies have experienced.

Neither G.M. nor Wal-Mart favors a government-based central payer system. But older companies and their unions are very interested in Congressional measures that would allow early retirees under age 65 to qualify for Medicare or to buy into the Medicare program, with help from their former employers, said Alan Reuther, legislative director of the United Automobile Workers.

General Motors has far different concerns, of course, than Wal-Mart, a retailer that covers more than one million employees and dependents in the United States but does not provide a retiree health benefit.

Another set of issues divides large companies from small businesses, which employ 50 percent of working Americans. Their owners worry that in some states they may be forced to spend for coverage of young workers with little interest in health coverage.

“The premium keeps going up and, even worse, the insurance companies keep decreasing the benefits,” said Steve Caughran, who owns three small companies in Fresno, Calif. One, a Quiznos fast-food restaurant, has 14 uninsured high school and college students who work part time.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Requiring employers to cover workers who lack health insurance will hardly correct the forces pushing up costs, like expensive new drugs, insurance fraud and inefficient state programs, Mr. Caughran argues.

Mr. Camden of Kelly Services notes that the majority of the 45 million Americans who do not have health insurance have jobs. He argues that many of these workers are essential to keeping the United States economy competitive.

“In the next decade or two, manufacturing is going to steadily decline,” he said. “Employment will come from the entrepreneurial, scientific parts of the economy,” including many who work as independent contractors and temporary employees.

Part of the solution should be to “separate health care from employer sponsorship,” Mr. Camden said. “The employer-provided health care system is just dead, although some people haven’t recognized it as dead yet.”

Similarly, Andrew L. Stern, president of the Service Employees International Union, criticizes the current employer-sponsored system as “a relic of the industrial economy.”

Mr. Camden listed possible remedies as an “employment-based” withholding tax, matched by employers as in Social Security, with Medicare and Medicaid expanded to cover the unemployed.

But most big companies are not ready to give up on their health care obligations. “Regardless of who takes the lead, we collectively as a national society have to consolidate around three or four different ideas,” Mr. MacDonald of I.B.M. said.

He called for a national debate on such topics as maintaining existing employer-subsidized health care, with “some level of umbrella coverage over that, some level of a single payer system.”

“A lot of positioning is going on now,” he said. “The reality is that changes are inevitable, I think sooner rather than later.”