To the Editor:

''Keeping Patients' Details Private, Even From Kin'' (news article, July 3) was important because it targeted the pitfalls in the federal law intended to protect confidential medical information.

As a geriatric care manager, I am confronted with the downside of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act on a routine basis.

Many adult children whose parents named them as health care proxies and gave them powers of attorney are shocked to learn that in a medical crisis providers refuse to offer medical information.

The confusion, frustration and unnecessary red tape adding to the burden imposed on professionals and advocates to provide care for vulnerable individuals is a continuing challenge.

The bizarre hodgepodge of regulations that were layered into the law have made health providers nervous about fines and jail terms, and in many cases, they have gone overboard misinterpreting the law.

All Americans welcome the respect for their privacy in medical matters, but not to their detriment.

Teri Koff

New York, July 3, 2007

To the Editor:

I believe, from personal experience, that details of a patient's illness should be kept private from kin if the patient is conscious and does not want certain details revealed.

Two years ago, I drove myself to a hospital emergency room with only moderate pain in my right and left shoulder. Since I am over 70, I was immediately given nitroglycerine, and the dose was repeated three times during my emergency room stay.

I was brought two more times to the emergency room, each time with more severe pains. I was then correctly diagnosed with pericarditis. The last hospital wanted to admit me, but I signed myself out against doctor's advice.

When my daughter called at my request, the doctor told her I might die unless I stayed at the hospital. I needed my daughter's involvement, since I could not drive myself to see my doctor, but I did not want to scare her, as she was the mother of a toddler and pregnant with her second child.

I told my doctor that I did not want anyone telling my family that I might die. I was told that my only choice was to prohibit the doctor from giving any information to my family or having no control over what was said.

I am now enjoying excellent health. I put a letter in my file instructing the doctor to share all dire warnings only with me.

Susan Stern

Newton, Mass., July 3, 2007