“There’s traditionally been nothing more disempowering than becoming a hospital patient,” said Joel Seligman, president and chief executive of Northern Westchester Hospital.

“If you went into a store, you’d expect respect and courtesy, so why shouldn’t that happen when you’re having an operation?” he said. “If someone is making an incision in your body, why shouldn’t you be able to fully understand that, fully understand the choices, fully communicate with people about what the plan is and how it’s going?”

Some of the changes Northern Westchester has made over the past six years are simple and relatively inexpensive. Patient rooms now have whiteboards, on which are written the names of the medical staff members who will be caring for them and the procedures patients can expect. Patients have easier access to their medical records. They can generally order meals when they want them and choose from a menu, rather than have a tray dropped off on a table.

Nightgowns with pink flowers and pinstriped pajamas have largely replaced thin cotton gowns. Integrative medicine — like aromatherapy, acupuncture, reiki and guided imagery — are offered in conjunction with traditional medicine.

Special attention has also been given to the ambience. Announcements on a public-address system are used only for emergency situations; rubber flooring further mutes noise. An instrument called the Yakker Tracker monitors decibel levels on the floors, and there are signs reminding staff members and visitors to quiet down. Original artwork, donated by a local museum, lines the hallways.

At Hudson Valley Hospital Center, in Cortlandt Manor, a new addition under construction will create a similar healing atmosphere, hospital officials say. Patient rooms will include more natural light, better views and natural plants. The project, scheduled to be completed in 2009, also aims to reduce noise and stress, all with an eye toward creating a calming atmosphere.

Many hospital changes are not cosmetic; they have more to do with attitude. Linda Rowell, staff development director at Four Winds Hospital, a psychiatric hospital in Katonah, said that care could be transformed simply by remembering that a human being remained at the center of all the hospital’s work.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

For instance, in the past, with large numbers of patients living in the same unit, shower times were scheduled throughout the day.

“From our point of view, you think cleanliness and structure,” Ms. Rowell said. “But as a patient, you think, ‘I’m being told my shower is at 3 p.m.’ From the human point of view, who wants the 3 p.m. shower? You want one in the morning or the evening.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

So at no cost and with a little flexibility, patients gained a little autonomy on when they would get clean.

Both Four Winds and Northern Westchester Hospitals are affiliated with Planetree, a nonprofit organization based in Connecticut that seeks to transform health care by understanding the perspective of the patient.

“The pressure that staff is under in all hospitals is just unbelievable,” said Janet Siegel, executive vice president for external affairs at Four Winds. “An affiliation with Planetree gives you a focus to rally around. There’s no more money, there’s no more people, there’s no more time. Now how are you going to make it better?”

At Northern Westchester Hospital’s outpatient cancer center, one way was to hang pictures of nature scenes on the ceiling, so patients who lie down during treatments have something to look at. If they choose, they are given headphones and guided imagery to help manage anxiety.

The waiting area has an almost spa-like feel, with lemon water and snacks of dried fruits and rice crackers. Volunteers offer hand massages, and patients wear thick terry cloth robes. Nurses offer aromatherapy — peppermint seems to help with nausea from chemotherapy. There is an herb garden, where aloe — which can be rubbed on radiation burns — grows.

There is also increasing recognition that hospitals might be nearly as traumatic for family members as they are for patients. More flexibility and support for visitors can help. The intensive care unit once strictly limited visitors’ access; now a family member can get a sleeper chair in the room. Even if a patient is facing a life-threatening situation, loved ones are not shooed away.

“When a family is present during an emergency procedure, it lets them see what we’re actually doing for a patient,” said Judy Kinkel, a nurse and manager of critical care at Northern Westchester. “Sometimes it works as a closure; they see that we did our best. Sometimes they just want to hold their hand for the final moments.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

When the stress of having a hospitalized family member is too much, relatives can visit Northern Westchester’s new center for “caregivers.” With its cozy chairs, faux fireplace, massage chair and waterfall sculpture, it is meant to be an oasis for visitors who need time away from a chronically ill patient’s bedside.

The center was the brainchild of Marian Hamilton, of Armonk, whose husband, Ken, died of lung cancer in 2004. Mrs. Hamilton said that when her husband was ill, his care was good, but no support services were available to her.

“It was such an overwhelmingly difficult time in our lives,” she said. “Every day is the same, and it’s relentless. I’d sit in this depressing waiting room thinking, what was I going to do with my life after my husband died?”

Mrs. Hamilton raised money for the center and planned it in detail, from stocking it with comfort food (peanut butter, oatmeal, cheese, cookies and warm drinks) to services — computers (“I’d go home exhausted and face a long list of e-mails,” she said), a library and volunteers trained to work with families in crisis.

Mr. Seligman, the Northern Westchester executive, said that many hospitals were working to improve the way they deliver care.

“We created unhappiness in the population at large by forcing them to give up all control of their lives when they enter a hospital,” he said. “Everyone is really playing catch-up in that area.”