At a time when the presidential candidates are spending hundreds of millions of dollars to flood the airwaves with information about themselves and their positions, it is disturbing that they have provided only limited information about their health.

The presidency is a physically demanding, hugely stressful job. There is no excuse for both candidates’ failure to fully disclose medical records that clearly bear on their ability to do that job.

The big gaps in what the nominees have been willing to make public were described in The Times on Monday by Lawrence K. Altman, a medical reporter who is also a physician. Senator John McCain has put out far more information than his rival, but under such restricted conditions that it is impossible to nail down the truth about his past melanomas, the most dangerous form of skin cancer. Senator Barack Obama has put out such meager information that voters have to take it largely on his campaign’s say-so that he is in good health.

Senator McCain allowed a small pool of reporters to review 1,200 pages of medical records during a three-hour period and then allowed a few of his doctors at the Mayo Clinic in Arizona to answer questions by telephone for 45 minutes. The reporters were not allowed to photocopy any documents, making it harder for them to ask other experts what the medical findings might imply.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The most critical questions raised by the McCain documents concern his four melanomas. The records show that Army pathologists would have classified one of his melanomas as more severe than his own doctors did. Mr. McCain has survived for eight years since that melanoma was removed, but some cancer experts won’t breathe easily until 10 years have passed.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In contrast to Senator McCain’s voluminous records, Senator Obama issued an undated, single-page letter from his personal doctor asserting that he is in “excellent health” and that there are no known medical problems that would affect his ability to serve as president. The Obama campaign has refused to make the doctor available for interviews.