Unless Congress acts to make Medicare payments to health care providers appropriate for the increasing costs of treating patients and inflationary realities, widespread use of electronic records will be slow to come.

Eric J. Wolf

Bronx, June 24, 2008

The writer is a clinical instructor in ophthalmology at Columbia University and a visiting instructor at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.

?

To the Editor:

The benefits of electronic patient records would extend beyond the ability to order prescriptions online and better clinical decisions. They would be a great benefit for epidemiological research requiring collection of data about disease incidence and prevalence, safety and efficacy of prescribed drugs after they have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration and surgical procedures.

Without such electronic data, epidemiological research is far more time-consuming and expensive. It can take hours to go through paper records searching for cases with a rare disease or a toxic reaction to a prescribed drug, a task that would require just a few keystrokes with electronic records.

Photo

Malcolm Zaretsky

Berkeley, Calif., June 24, 2008

The writer is a researcher in cell and molecular biology at the University of California, Berkeley.

To the Editor:

Your editorial says doctors’ resistance is a barrier to the adoption of electronic records. Doctors recognize that electronic records are not a magical panacea. Even with the best available software, some aspects of patient care can improve while other errors or problems are introduced.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Issues of privacy are an additional concern. As we have all learned, the possibility of releasing millions of records is all too real.

Our health care system makes electronic health records a technical coating on top of a deeply flawed foundation. Addressing each of these issues, including the cost, in collaboration with doctors is much more likely to increase use of electronic records and achieve our common goal of improving the quality of care for all Americans. Laura Fochtmann

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Arlington, Va., June 24, 2008

The writer is chairwoman of the American Psychiatric Association committee on electronic health records.

?

To the Editor:

A doctor I see is one of the 4 percent of doctors who make full use of electronic records to assist their practices. It seems obvious to me that having lab results, previous clinical observations and recommendations at her fingertips enhances the care she provides.

On the other hand, visits to this doctor involve minutes spent while she locates my health records on the computer, and minutes spent as she enters new data, all the while with her gaze and attention fixed on the computer rather than on me. The tap-tap of her fingers indicates that she is too busy to be taking in whatever I have to tell her, and that the electronic task has been elevated over the old-fashioned hands-on approach to clinical care.

Once records are enshrined in my doctor’s computer, they are available for her use and the use of other doctors in her clinic. However, they fail to travel beyond the clinic to the office of my primary care doctor because apparently the task of faxing them over is too onerous in this high-tech age.

Getting electronic records to my primary care doctor, who oversees all aspects of my health, requires a more basic effort: a hand-carry by the patient.

So much, and so little, progress!

Joyce Adams

Portland, Ore., June 24, 2008

?

To the Editor:

The United States health care system definitely needs to cut costs, increase use of electronic health records and improve the quality of patient care, as is happening in other countries. But those countries have something that we lack — a national health plan. Shouldn’t that tell us something? Nisson Schechter

East Setauket, N.Y., June 24, 2008