If that proves to be the worst reading for this recession, it will be a smaller decline than in the downturns of 1990 to 1991, or in the brief 1980 recession, and less than half the decline in the 1973-75 recession.

That performance may be misleading, however. Personal income includes the cost of benefits, so rising health care expenses for employees count in that number. The decline would be larger if it were based strictly on wage and salary receipts.

The two areas in which this is already the worst recession since 1960 are employment and industrial production. The number of jobs in the country has fallen by 3.7 percent, exceeding the 3.1 percent decline in the 1981-82 recession. Economists generally expect those numbers to get worse before they stabilize.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The 13.4 percent fall in industrial production, while worse than in previous recessions, is better than in some countries. The worldwide recession has slashed both production and international trade, and the impact is being felt most in export-driven economies in Asia.

The fourth category used in the coincident indicators is manufacturing and trade sales, a broad picture of total transactions in the economy. Adjusted for inflation, that has fallen 9.8 percent since the peak, a bit more than the decline in 1981-82 but not yet close to the 12.9 percent decline in the 1970s recession.

This recession is also bidding to be the longest in recent history. If it ends in May — which seems unlikely — it will have lasted 16 months, tying it with the 1973-75 and 1981-82 downturns as the longest since World War II.

The Index of Coincident Indicators did not exist in the 1930s. But there is no doubt that the declines in the Great Depression would have been far greater than anything experienced since.

It also lasted much longer. As measured by the National Bureau, there were actually two recessions during the period we now remember as the Great Depression — 1929 to 1933 and 1937 to 1938 — separated by a recovery that did not come close to restoring the economy to its pre-Depression size. That first downturn lasted 43 months, nearly three times as long as this recession has lasted until now.

Correction: An earlier version of this article and its accompanying chart misstated several percentage comparisons because of an erroneous formula.