In my Findings column, I discuss reasons for the longevity gap between the United States and most other developed countries. Our shorter life expectancy has often been blamed on the health-care system’s failings. But after looking at mortality trends and treatment patterns, Samuel H. Preston and Jessica Y. Ho of the University of Pennsylvania reach another verdict: “We conclude that the low longevity ranking of the United States is not likely to be a result of a poorly functioning health-care system.”

This is a noteworthy conclusion coming from the eminent demographer for whom the Preston Curve is named. Dr. Preston, who is an expert on trends in mortality and disease, and Ms. Yo dispute the much-quoted scorecard from the Commonwealth Fund issued last year. The Commonwealth report ranked America last among industrialized nations in “mortality amenable to health care,” and estimated that 101,000 lives would be saved annually if the U.S. health-care system performed as well the systems in France, Japan or Australia. The estimates were based on a study, supported by the Commonwealth Fund, that was published in the journal Health Affairs last year by Ellen Nolte and C. Martin McKee of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. The Penn researchers raise several criticisms of those estimates of preventable deaths, and I’ll discuss some of the specifics in a subsequent post, along with a response from Dr. Nolte and Dr. McKee.

For now, let’s concentrate on the basic argument of Dr. Preston: that the longevity gap is due not to the American health-care system but to other factors, like rates of obesity and the exceptionally heavy smoking that prevailed among Americans for until the 1980s. (Per-capita consumption was higher than in any other developed country, particularly among women.) Dr. Preston and Ms. Ho write: “The health care system could be performing exceptionally well in identifying and administering treatment for various diseases, but a country could still have poor measured health if personal health-care practices were unusually deleterious.”

The Penn researchers cite a variety of evidence that Americans (including the uninsured) receive more thorough treatment in many ways than people in other countries. At the same time, they acknowledge the system is much costlier than other countries’ and can be criticized on many grounds. They write:

Evidence that the major diseases are effectively diagnosed and treated in the US does not mean that there may not be great inefficiencies in the US health care system. A list of prominent charges include fragmentation, duplication, inaccessibility of records, the practice of defensive medicine, misalignment of physician and patient incentives, limitations of access for a large fraction of the population, and excessively fast adoption of unproven technologies . . . Just as we are not addressing issues of efficiency on the production side, we are not treating patient welfare as the main outcome. Practices that produce greater longevity do not necessarily enhance well-being. This potential disparity is central to the controversy involving PSA testing, which uncovers many cancers that would never kill patients but whose treatment often produces adverse side effects. The question that we have posed is much simpler: does a poor performance by the U.S. health care system account for the low international ranking of longevity in the U.S.? Our answer is, “no”.

Now for your answer (or, if you, prefer, more questions about the paper by Dr. Preston and Ms. Ho).