A joint Google-I.B.M. announcement on Wednesday night about software to link medical devices to Google’s personal health records, on its face, isn’t much of an announcement.

It is a directional declaration of intent by two brand-name companies. But notably lacking, it seems, is a list of device makers, with amen quotes, hailing the software as the foundational technology that will help jump-start the market for Internet-connected home-monitoring devices. These potentially range from glucose meters and blood-pressure cuffs for managing chronic conditions like diabetes and heart disease to digital weight scales and pulse monitors for personal health and fitness.

Still, the I.B.M.-Google pact is quite intriguing on a few fronts. Digital medical devices and online personal health records (like those offered by Google and Microsoft) are not the target of the $20 billion proposed by the Obama administration to accelerate the use of electronic medical records (typically tethered to doctors’ offices, clinics and hospitals).

But they are part of the same health information technology ecosystem, which is rapidly evolving. The I.B.M. software for linking devices and personal health records does provide for the fluid sharing of data among patients and health-care providers, according to the standards of an industry group, the Continua Health Alliance. And the legislation appropriating $20 billion for electronic health records calls for such data sharing, or interoperability. “This is a proof point that what the president wants to happen is possible,” said Dan Pelino, a general manager for I.B.M.’s health care and life sciences business.

The partnership announcement is also a sign that Google may be getting its act together in the health care arena. Google has assembled some outstanding people, attracted a blue-chip advisory group and started a few high-profile pilot projects including ones with Cleveland Clinic and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston. But Google’s health initiative seems to have lacked strategy, leadership and focus, especially after the health team’s original head, Adam Bosworth, left in September 2007.

The view among health providers and medical experts is that the Google effort in health has so far been much less professional than Microsoft’s drive, led by Peter Neupert. Indeed, when the Cleveland Clinic wanted to try a home-monitoring pilot project last fall, it reached out to Microsoft instead of Google, despite the Internet company’s previous work with the Cleveland Clinic.

But by linking with I.B.M., Google picks up something it lacks — expertise in the industry of health care. Sameer Samat, the director for Google Health, implicitly acknowledged that when discussing the announcement the other day. “I.B.M. has a large services practice in health care and a tremendous installed base of its technology in medium-sized and large health care providers,” he said.

So it’s a smart move by Google. And because it is so early in the trend toward the digitization and consumerization of health information, Google’s early stumbling can be seen as an investment in learning a new field. Anything significant Google does in health is worth watching.