Health care reform is a big, nasty, complicated, sensitive subject. And everybody wants something different out of it.

So, in the spirit of our “Ideal Stimulus Package” collection, we decided to compile ideas about what the American health care system should look like.

We asked all sorts of experts and stakeholders to answer this question: What should the priorities for health care reform be?

We will be running their responses in loosely themed batches throughout the day. The first batch — about consumers, patients and workers — is below. Find other proposals from doctors, businesses, biotech investors, insurance companies, tax and public finance experts and more here.

Share your own thoughts here.

Improve Health, Not the Health Care System

Dana P. Goldman is chairman and director of health economics, finance and organization at the RAND Corporation. He is also a professor at U.C.L.A.

One reason that health reform proposals always seem to fail is that proponents promise too much. Reformers declare they will improve quality, lower costs and increase access — all at the same time. This mantra is repeated so often — on both sides of the ideological divide — that the public tends to believe it is possible, when really it isn’t.

I want to suggest a new priority — improve health, not the health care system.

This may sound like a parsing exercise, but it is not. Consider the evidence. Many of the greatest improvements in health during the last century had little to do with the health care system. Clean water, public sanitation and reduced smoking all reflect public health interventions that had dramatic benefits.

Read more… “Many of the greatest improvements in health during the last century had little to do with the health care system.” Cardiovascular disease is another good example. Between 1980 to 2000, the death rate for coronary heart disease was cut in half. But only about half of this reduction came from better medical therapies. The rest — lower blood pressure, lower cholesterol, less smoking, and other factors — came from better behavior and some drugs. And treatment of heart disease is one of our greatest success stories. Our accomplishments in diabetes, cancer and lung disease are not nearly as impressive. So good health is only partially a story about excellent health care. Advocates of universal coverage often get confused on this point. They equate good health with having health insurance, and cite myriad academic studies. The problem is that these studies don’t account for all the other differences between the insured and uninsured — what they eat, where they live, whether they smoke or drink, the amount of stress in their lives, and even their genetic predisposition to disease. No health care system is good enough to fully compensate for bad behavior and poor environmental factors. With a growing elderly population — and a larger baby boom generation approaching retirement — the prevalence of chronic diseases will rise. If current trends continue, health care costs will consume an ever-increasing share of national income. The future liability of the Medicare program alone is estimated to be $24 trillion over the next 75 years, absent any policy changes. So what can we do? Well, the first step is to invest, not in the health care system, but in education. We should take the $120 billion it might cost for universal coverage, and use it to provide earlier education and to improve the quality of education. Better educated people live longer, are less likely to be disabled, and engage in healthier behavior. They also are better at self-managing their chronic disease. And, unlike universal coverage, more education has other valuable benefits to a person and society. Less crime, less divorce and higher earnings — can universal health insurance promise that? The second place to invest is prevention. Primary prevention has the capacity to slow or reduce the rising prevalence of chronic disease, and simultaneously attenuate the downstream spending associated with it. Equally importantly, however, prevention leads to a life with less disability and more years of an active lifestyle. It just makes a lot of sense to avoid disease in the first place, rather than try to treat it later. There are also sound economic arguments for a strong government role to prevent disease. Because the benefits of prevention often accrue decades later — long after someone has switched employers or health plans — private plans will skimp on prevention coverage. The government needs to step in to fill this void. Medicare could save itself money, for example, by paying for anti-hypertensive medication before people turn 65. Perhaps most strikingly, my colleagues and I estimate that if we could roll back obesity to levels seen in the 1980s, we could save up to $1 trillion. We need to find a way to make this happen. One way may involve better medicine — an obesity pill — but it may mean other methods having little to do with health care. Maybe it is an extra hour of physical education at school, or subsidized treadmills in the workplace, or even pedometers for all Americans. Clearly there would be huge returns to a substantial investment to combat obesity. It is time for us to put the priority on health, not health care.

Insure Long-Term Care

Nancy Folbre is an economics professor at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.

I used to worry more about getting sick than getting old, but of course the two are closely related.

When people talk about health insurance, they’re usually referring to acute-care insurance — as in, who will pay for your open-heart surgery. But what about long-term assistance for individuals dealing with chronic illness like congestive heart failure? Along with disabled children and adults, many of the elderly need assistance to live on their own. Without such assistance they often land in expensive and sometimes even unhealthy nursing homes.

“Most married men already have insurance to help cope with the frailties of old age. It’s called a wife.”

Medicare generally doesn’t pay for long-term care. Medicaid, a means-tested program available only to low-income individuals, pays only if assets are spent down below a $2,000 limit. Financed by states and the federal government, it directs far more resources to nursing homes than to home and community-based services.

Read more… Medicaid paid for about one-half of the nation’s long-term care expenditures in 2004, and many states are reeling under the budgetary pressure, especially during the current recession. You can buy long-term care insurance on your own, but it costs a fortune, and warnings are written all over the package. As Consumer Reports points out — and recent Congressional hearings confirm — many policies appear complex and risky. Only about 10 percent of seniors have purchased them. Elderly women, in particular, would benefit from reform of our long-term care system. Most married men already have insurance to help cope with the frailties of old age. It’s called a wife. If you marry someone who is both older and has a shorter life expectancy than you — as most women do — you are left vulnerable. About 75 percent of nursing home residents and about 67 percent of home health care users are women. Women also represent the majority of caregivers. Heavily concentrated in direct care jobs, they often earn less than men with comparable skills in other occupations. As unpaid care providers they are often forced to take time out of paid employment, with harmful consequences for their own long-term economic welfare. Several long-term care initiatives are now under debate in Congress as part of health care reform. The Community Living Assistance Services and Supports (CLASS) Act of 2009 introduced by Senator Edward Kennedy enjoys support from many groups and represents a politically pragmatic approach, emphasizing personal choice and leaving plenty of scope for the private insurance business. Individuals would be automatically enrolled unless they opt out of paying the premium of about $65 a month that would finance the benefits. Cash benefits would go directly to individuals needing assistance with activities of daily living, giving them the flexibility to support family caregivers as well as to purchase the services they need. The costs to taxpayers are difficult to estimate, but the program would certainly address many of the problems described above. Here’s the down side. Many younger workers (especially men) might opt out, leaving a gaping hole in revenue projections (hence the difficulty of estimating costs to taxpayers). The benefits offered, limited to $100 a day for the most serious level of disability, might not be adequate for many, like victims of Alzheimer’s disease. Affluent consumers will be expected to purchase supplemental private insurance. What’s the alternative? Universal public long-term care insurance. German policies in this area once resembled our own, but in 1994 Germnay shifted to a long-term-care program financed by a dedicated tax (somewhat like our Medicare system) that provides generous support for home and community-based care. It’s a cost-effective program that enjoys considerable political support from voters. We would need to adapt such a program to our institutional environment and think carefully about its budgetary implications. But something along these lines should go on the table along with other proposed health care reforms. It could potentially improve the efficiency of our overall health care system and make many of us feel better about growing old.

Lower Costs for Working Families

John Sweeney is president of the 11-million-member A.F.L.-C.I.O., the umbrella organization of the labor movement.

Behind all the rhetoric, poll-tested language and political brinkmanship of the health care debate is the real desire of families to be able to get the care they need, from a physician of their choice, at a price they can afford.

It is just that simple for families who have seen their wages stagnate and their budgets undermined by the rising costs of health care — costs generated by a dysfunctional and unsustainable health insurance system. Working families need Congressional action to assure quality and affordable care, and they need it now.

Some will say we can’t fix health care until the economy is back on its feet again. But in fact, it’s more the other way around.

Read more… Excessively high health care costs are a drag on economic recovery as working families put more and more money into health care instead of consumer purchases. Working people are falling further and further behind and too many wind up bankrupt when they’re sick — the leading root cause of personal bankruptcy in our nation is a major health care crisis. Meanwhile, companies that provide adequate employee health care benefits are at a severe competitive disadvantage against companies that do not. “Some will say we can’t fix health care until the economy is back on its feet again. But in fact, it’s more the other way around.” We simply will not be able to fix our economy for the long term until we fix our health care system. So what should health care reform look like? We have heard it repeatedly: We must lower health care costs in order to provide affordable options for families. Lower costs will go a long way toward expanding access to more people and relieving the pocketbook pressures on even those with insurance. Our current system is unaffordable. With a system with a price tag of $2.3 trillion a year, we are spending more and more money and getting less and less health care for our dollars. This model is shutting people out of the system: people like Karen from Florida, who recently told of an insurance deductible that equals four to five months of her take-home pay each year even though her insurance bill is split with her employer. Karen feels she can’t even afford to see a doctor. Health care providers have to do their part to eliminate inequities in health care and all employers must be required to pay their fair share. Changing the way we pay for health care must also be a part of the solution. We cannot continue to pay for expensive technology and treatments that have no evidence of effectiveness. Health care providers should be compensated for the quality – and not the quantity – of health care they deliver. As the technology revolution continues to sweep our country and change the way we communicate, our health care system has fallen behind. We must streamline and modernize the way we access medical records and eliminate inefficiencies and flaws in the system that cost money and cost lives. Despite protests by those who offer no solutions, it is clear that government must have a role in controlling costs and regulating private insurance. We need a quality public insurance plan option that will end the dominance and price-gouging of private insurers. The public is demanding it. A recent NBC/Wall Street Journal poll confirms that 76 percent of the public wants a quality public health care option. It is time we heed the advice of those we are trying to help. It’s hard, but we are closer than ever to achieving quality, affordable health care for everyone. We must not let the momentum languish or get caught up in the rhetoric of naysayers who would prefer to continue the status quo. We owe it to families who work hard every day and who deserve health care that works for everyone.

Ways to Put the Consumer First

Jim Guest is president and chief executive of Consumers Union, the nonprofit publisher of Consumer Reports magazine and ConsumerReports.org.

Medical costs are soaring at twice the rate of inflation. Even if you don’t pay the bills directly, you see the increase in higher insurance premiums, deductibles and co-pays.

And what are you getting for your money? A system that often limits your choices of doctors and hospitals, fails to cover needed services, forces you to satisfy a complex web of rules to get reimbursed, locks you into a job for fear of losing coverage, and strands you without affordable protection if you lose insurance after experiencing health problems, sometimes even minor ones.

Read more… Tackling the enormous cost of health care must be a top priority of any reform plan. Unless costs are controlled, we will face a “death spiral” where more and more Americans will be unable to afford coverage, more healthy people will roll the dice of going without coverage leaving only those with health problems in the insurance pool, thus further raising the cost of coverage. Providers who treat growing numbers of uninsured who need care but can’t pay for it (and are often much sicker because they delayed seeking care) will recover those costs through higher charges for those who have insurance. So the cost spiral continues upward, with dire consequences for individuals, families and our whole economy. “What are you getting for your money? A system that often limits your choices of doctors and hospitals, fails to cover needed services, forces you to satisfy a complex web of rules to get reimbursed, locks you into a job for fear of losing coverage, and strands you without affordable protection if you lose insurance after experiencing health problems, sometimes even minor ones.” In a system as large and complex as ours there is no single silver bullet. But it’s widely acknowledged that health care can become more affordable, and better, without restricting needed care. To do so, several changes are essential. First, everyone should be covered so they get preventive services as well as protection from financial devastation from a major health problem. Covering everyone would spread the costs of insurance (which is, after all, the purpose of insurance) across a larger, healthier pool. Second, doctors and other providers should be paid to work together to help us stay healthy, not for piecemeal services that are frequently uncoordinated, duplicative, ineffective and sometimes even harmful. This would go a long way in addressing the biggest cost driver today: chronic illnesses, which account for about 75 percent of health costs in the United States. Third, health insurers and providers should have incentives to compete on what’s really important: the cost and quality of care. That’s far from the case today, when consumers lack information needed to make the best choices of health plans, doctors, hospitals and treatment options. For the marketplace to work, we must have better information to compare. The health insurance exchange being considered would organize information so consumers can see how health plans compare on quality measures and apples-to-apples costs — but that requires standard data and health information technology. Better comparative information on what treatments work best is also vitally needed so doctors have the best science-based information to help decide how to treat us. The availability of a public insurance option alongside private plans is critical to keeping costs down. Opponents of reform paint the public insurance option as a government “takeover” of health care. Not true. It would be another insurer that uses the same providers as private insurance plans to deliver care. You would still have the option to keep your private insurer, but there would be more choices. Increased competition would improve quality and cost, and bring real choices to the many markets now dominated by just one or two private carriers. Fixing health care will take hard work by many and some degree of sacrifice by all. But Americans have faced, and conquered, bigger challenges in the past. We must act now, or pay a devastating price in cost and quality in the future.

Six Goals to Fix a Broken System

Jennie Chin Hansen is president of the AARP.

The nation’s broken health care system has finally reached the top of the domestic agenda, and lawmakers are working feverishly to write legislation that will finally fix it.

Affordable health care choices for all Americans must be the goal. Yet this basic necessity is increasingly out of reach, and the recession has made a serious problem worse as workers lose their benefits and prices continue to rise.

More than seven million Americans ages 50 to 64 have no health insurance, usually because they cannot afford it. They are asked to pay far higher premiums, just because of their age, or they’re rejected outright because of their medical history.