Supporters of comparative effectiveness reviews include many medical researchers, consumer groups, unions and insurers. They say such studies are essential to curbing the widespread use of ineffective treatments and to helping control health care costs, which totaled $2.2 trillion in 2007, or 16 percent of the nation’s gross domestic product.

But the effort has come under attack by critics, including some conservative commentators and medical products companies, who warn that the process could lead to inadequate treatment for some patients and even the rationing of health care. There also may be sharp Congressional debate in the weeks ahead on issues like whether a new federal entity should be created to oversee government-financed comparative research and what role private industry might play in the effort.

Dr. Sox said that medical products makers had a “muted” response to the panel’s efforts, including its call for public comments and recommendations on what should receive financing for comparativeness reviews. Of the approximately 2,000 recommendations the panel received, only 28 came from makers of medical devices, drugs or biologic products, he said.

While medical products manufacturers pay for clinical trials of their own products, such studies often compare a drug or device’s effectiveness in treating an illness against a placebo or no treatment, rather than against a competing product or treatment. In addition, people selected for clinical trials often do not represent the many different types of patients who will receive a drug or device after it is approved by federal regulators for sale.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In many areas of medicine, there is frequently more than one treatment with no clear winner. To treat prostate cancer, for example, a patient is faced with strategies ranging from watchful waiting to surgery to the use of radioactive implants.

A similar conundrum faces patients diagnosed with abnormal heart rhythm known as atrial fibrillation. In such cases, a doctor may recommend drugs or a surgical procedure known as ablation, with little evidence as to which strategy works better or has fewer side effects.

The Institute of Medicine panel said studying both those conditions should be among the top priorities.

The panel, composed of doctors, health care experts and consumers, was convened at the request of Congress. Its recommendations are expected to have an impact on how some of $1.1 billion initially allotted by lawmakers for comparative effectiveness research is spent.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Along with recommending 100 health areas for comparative effectiveness reviews, the panel’s report focused heavily on setting up systems for collecting the data to undertake such studies and ensuring that such information is clearly communicated to patients. The panel also urged that the government subsidize the training of a new generation of researchers skilled in doing comparative effectiveness reviews.

While most of health areas cited by the panel involved medical treatments, others included topics like the best way to reduce hospital-based infections or to compare the effectiveness of differing medical imaging technologies.

Some of the panel’s recommendations also involved social or preventative issues that could generate controversy among industry or interest groups. For example, the panel urged that researchers look at the effectiveness of school programs to reduce childhood obesity through means like bans on vending machines. It also recommended research to determine the programs most effective in reducing unwanted pregnancies, including the free distribution of contraceptives.

Speaking to reporters Tuesday, Dr. Sox, the medical journal editor, said that based on public comments, the panel had decided it was important to look at such public health issues.