Maintaining the doctor-patient relationship required adaptation to technology, not submission to it.

Jihad Shoshara

La Grange, Ill., March 6, 2009

The writer is a medical doctor.

?

To the Editor:

I must agree wholeheartedly with Dr. Anne Armstrong-Coben: the presence of a computer in the exam room is more of a detriment than an advantage.

The physician focuses on the computer and misses patient or parental body language (I’m a pediatrician, too). Awful mistakes may get clicked and pass unnoticed. Girls may be described as having male genitalia and vice versa.

What is most troublesome to me is that our residents — no matter how much we grayheads or graybeards model the approach to history-taking from parents — learn that the checklist on the computer screen is the thing to look at, and not the living person describing their child and her problems.

Howard Fischer

Detroit, March 6, 2009

The writer is a professor of pediatrics at Wayne State University School of Medicine.

?

To the Editor:

I could not agree more with Dr. Anne Armstrong-Coben. The computers we all use were invented as bookkeeping machines. At this they are superb.

They are not good at shoehorning the analog world into digital format. In fact, computers aren’t meant to help physicians; they are meant to gather data for others at the expense of physicians’ time, attention and job performance.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

I am an anesthesiologist. In the operating room, computerization is useful for recording metrics like pulse and blood pressure. Even here, computers hijack my attention and interfere with my job.

We can’t do two tasks at once, and computers require just that.

Michael Cox

Santa Barbara, Calif., March 6, 2009

Photo

?

To the Editor:

A mentor of mine once told a story of a patient whose son admired a certain Russian poet. He made a notation of this in his office note.

Several years later, upon seeing this woman again, he inquired as to whether her son “still read Pushkin.” The patient nearly fell off her chair, so taken was she by her doctor’s recalling this seemingly trivial but meaningful fact.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

I have used this anecdote repeatedly in my own career, jotting down reminders as to my own patients’ reading proclivities and other personal miscellany. Bringing up these tidbits at future visits is useful in creating trust between patient and doctor.

Unfortunately, I have yet to encounter an electronic medical record system that allows one to document the reading habits of the patient or his family members.

Ronald B. Cohen

Woodbury, N.Y., March 6, 2009

?

To the Editor:

Dr. Anne Armstrong-Coben makes a legitimate point about computerizing physicians’ notes. The model she describes is simply a glorified questionnaire, similar to the one on that clipboard we’re asked to fill out in the waiting room during our first visit. That model is neither efficient nor effective.

What could work would be to take notes as she is now doing, then scan them into the permanent electronic record. This would achieve the accessibility of electronic records, and the personalization she wishes to retain.

As for the illegible handwriting: That’s a product of laziness; almost anyone can teach himself to write legibly!

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Warren Bailey

Qualicum Beach, British Columbia

March 6, 2009

The writer is a retired cardiac surgeon.

?

To the Editor:

This transference from human to computer, as if the records become the human, isn’t special to the medical profession. It exists in other professions and in any institution where personal data are electronically gathered.

It explains how you can feel as if you barely exist when in front of a keeper of these records, whether a doctor or a clerk at your local motor vehicle agency.

As they stare intently into their computer screens, they are looking at the real you that exists for them, the one in the computer.

Peter Carr

Berkeley, Calif., March 6, 2009

?

To the Editor:

Dr. Anne Armstrong-Coben’s story is a cautionary tale. It illustrates why most of the $17 billion in President Obama’s stimulus package for promoting electronic medical records will add to the cost of care, not reduce it.

Dr. Armstrong-Coben is applying the computer to a method of pediatric practice that has been in effect from time immemorial. The cost of computers has been added to the cost of her practice without, it seems, improving her efficiency.

What she ought to be doing is thinking up a new, better and less expensive way to provide health care to children that is practical only with computers and then get someone to develop a program to support it.

Not being a pediatrician, I would not presume to suggest what that way might be, but I’m sure that it is out there waiting to be discovered.

Richard Wittrup

Scituate, Mass., March 6, 2009

The writer is a retired hospital administrator.