Medical histories are among the most sensitive of our sensitive personal information. And our details have been spread from here to, well, all over the place — doctors’ offices, hospital archives, pharmacies, labs, billing companies and insurers’ computer networks.

Today, the World Privacy Forum has released a plain-spoken online guide that can help people regain some control and a measure of privacy over their health records.

The guide, a year in the making, takes on the less-than-fun challenge of dissecting complicated privacy rules created by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, or HIPAA, a 1996 federal statute that set data-privacy and security rules for key players in the American health care system. The new guide explains patient rights and provides practical advice about how to defend those rights using the law as well as basic social skills and common sense.

Especially useful are sections on how to retrieve medical records from the vortex that is our health system and request fixes if there are errors — vital stuff for anyone with a serious health condition or, for that matter, who’s moving to a new state, changing doctors, seeking a second opinion, considering a malpractice suit or concerned about false entries due to medical identity theft.

There’s also important information for people with ailments they prefer not to disclose to family members, friends or employers. Yes, you can ask the doctor’s office that’s treating you for a venereal disease to call you only on your cellphone and put any mail in plain sealed envelopes, and they should comply. But note that if you are hospitalized, for example, it will be harder to keep relatives and friends in the dark. You can make a formal request for confidentiality, but it probably won’t work. The better route is an informal appeal to your caregivers, W.P.F. says.

The guide also maps out how to seek redress if your rights have been violated, starting with contacting the chief privacy officer at the institution you’re having a problem with. If that fails, complain to the secretary of Health and Human Services via the Office of Civil Rights and perhaps also to your state’s health or insurance department. You can also go public, contacting any relevant licensing boards, writing bad reviews on the Web or, say, reaching out to a reporter.