You may want to make sure you know where your health insurance card is.

According to a new study, the 2010 Identity Fraud Survey Report, from the research company Javelin Strategy & Research, 7 percent of identity fraud victims this year reported identity thieves stole their health insurance information, up from just 3 percent last year.

So even though the actual total dollar amount of health care identity fraud didn’t increase meaningfully from 2008 to 2009, James Van Dyke, the president and founder of Javelin, said he expected to see more incidences of health insurance identity fraud showing up in next year’s study and beyond. “We’re seeing more criminal access to private medical records in our survey now, and therefore, we expect to see resulting increases in health care fraud in future years’ studies,” Mr. Van Dyke said.



Such health insurance identity theft occurs when someone impersonates someone else at a hospital or doctor’s office — using a stolen health insurance card or account number or even just personal information like a Social Security number or driver’s license – to get health care coverage for surgery or other treatment. People often learn they are victims of such fraud when they get a medical bill or a notice about what will be covered from their health insurance company.

The rise of this relatively new area of identity fraud (this year is the first Javelin has tracked annual shifts in such fraud) is mainly because of two factors, Mr. Van Dyke said: medical providers’ putting more records in more easily accessible electronic form, thanks to federal incentives to do so; and the large numbers of people unable to get health care coverage.

“Health care providers haven’t really focused as much on protecting the health care records, and with the incentives that are available for making these records electronic, we have a recipe for a growing problem,” he said. Plus, medical providers often will trust that patients without an insurance card are who they say they are if they have other proof, like a driver’s license, he said.

Such fraud is part of a broader rise in identity fraud — which Javelin defines as the unauthorized use of another person’s personal information for illicit financial gain — in the wake of the global economic downturn and high unemployment rates.

The study, which is based on a telephone survey in November and is co-sponsored by some financial services companies, estimated that the number of identity fraud victims in the United States increased by 12 percent, to 11.1 million adults in 2009, while the total annual fraud amount increased by 12.5 percent, to $54 billion.

Still, the average fraud resolution time dropped 30 percent, to 21 hours, partly because of increased consumer education and assistance from financial institutions, among other factors.

But according to Javelin, health insurance-related identity fraud is particularly troublesome because of the relative costs. The average identity fraud victim pays $373, while a health insurance fraud victim pays $2,228, and a health insurance fraud typically is about $12,100 in total, compared with $4,841 for an average identity fraud case.

In addition, because it’s a relatively new type of fraud, the health care industry doesn’t have processes and formulas in place for resolving such fraud quickly.

If you find yourself the victim of such fraud, Anne Wallace, president of the Identity Theft Assistance Center, a nonprofit group supported by the financial industry, recommended filing a police report and contacting the medical provider and your insurance company in writing, detailing how you were billed for services that weren’t for you and including a copy of the police report.

Resolution “does tend to happen, but it can take a lot longer than it does in other cases because it’s a relatively new phenomenon,” she said. Mr. Van Dyke, of Javelin, said he had encouraged the financial industry to help health care providers learn how to deal with such fraud.

Have you ever been a victim of health insurance-related fraud, and if so, how was the resolution process? If not, are you worried about such fraud and what tips do you have for not becoming a victim?