Attorney General Andrew M. Cuomo issued a subpoena to the New York State Senate on Thursday seeking the employment records of 10 Senate aides in the office of Pedro Espada Jr., the Senate majority leader, whose business and political activities are under scrutiny by Mr. Cuomo’s office and federal prosecutors.

Each of the aides, according to Mr. Cuomo’s office, were also involved with the Soundview HealthCare Network, a group of health care clinics in the Bronx founded by Mr. Espada, a Democrat.

Mr. Cuomo’s office filed a civil lawsuit on Tuesday against Mr. Espada, accusing him of siphoning millions of dollars from the clinics to pay for personal and campaign expenses. Investigators from Mr. Cuomo’s office and federal law enforcement agents raided Soundview’s offices on Wednesday.

Mr. Cuomo asked the Senate for time sheets, payroll records, records pertaining to travel and expenses, and records relating to job applications and hiring decisions.

The records cover several people who appear to have dual roles as Senate aides to Mr. Espada and employees or board members of Soundview. Mr. Cuomo claims that the Soundview board was filled with allies and family members of Mr. Espada’s and rubber-stamped millions of dollars in inappropriate expenditures.

“We want to know where these people worked and when,” Mr. Cuomo said in a statement. “We also want to know why they were hired and under what circumstances. It should be no surprise given the nature of these abuses that we would look to determine whether the misconduct reaches into the State Senate.”

Austin Shafran, a spokesman for the Senate Democratic majority, said the Senate would comply promptly with the subpoena.

“The Senate is reviewing personnel and travel records, and will satisfy the attorney general’s request once the documents have been collected,” Mr. Shafran said.

The subpoena appears to cover much, if not all, of Mr. Espada’s senior staff, including the senator’s director of outreach, his general counsel, his New York City director of community relations and several special assistants who act as senior advisers to Mr. Espada.