At the same time, his lawyers asserted, his wife noticed increasingly strange behavior by her husband, someone who had been notoriously fastidious in his youth. He started hoarding old clothes and materials like magazines, junk mail and patient records, and he resisted efforts to discard or reorganize his piles.

Starting in 2002, Dr. Sheth’s inclination to spend lots of time with patients apparently melded with a desire to make tons of money. With privileges at Advocate South Suburban Medical Center, Ingalls Hospital and a third unidentified hospital, he was able to gain access to personal and insurance information about the patients.

He then prepared handwritten notes, which he faxed to outside billing firms, about bogus treatment of those individuals. Those firms sent formal billings to Medicare and about 30 private insurers.

When it came to Medicare, Dr. Sheth used two codes, each of which represents critical cardiac treatment and is reimbursed at a high rate. He sent 14,800 billings over five years to Medicare alone, billing for 24 hours or more of work every day of the year. His use of the codes represented a disproportionate use of them in the entire United States, and more than all the doctors in some states, according to the defense.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

It allowed for the purchase of multiple homes, numerous bank accounts and investments, nothing especially covert or overseas. When caught in 2007, Dr. Sheth — a man who says he engaged in Hindu prayers and meditation for nearly three hours each morning as opposed to the normal 45 minutes — confessed to getting $13 million in illegal payments.

He was also found in possession of more than 600 uncashed checks amounting to $6.8 million, most of which the government argued was the result of fraudulent billings.

The defense team of James Fieweger and Anton Valukas argued that Dr. Sheth suffers from severe obsessive-compulsive disorder, and it hired a psychiatrist to bolster the claim. Steven Dollear, an assistant United States attorney, called that poppycock, pointing out that the phony billings ending abruptly after the government confronted him.

Dr. Sheth simply “wanted to practice medicine his way, but he also wanted to enjoy financial success,” Mr. Dollear said. Weirdly, the doctor did not bill for some of his bona fide patients.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

On Aug. 10 he got a more lenient sentence than the government had sought, stiffer than the defense had desired. His license is suspended indefinitely and all his ill-gotten gains and homes and cars will be forfeited. The government has received $11 million so far. His marriage is over.

Lucky man, the tale got scant attention in the Chicago news media, not much beyond a short Tribune article whose alteration of a government press release was so slight, it’s surprising that United States Attorney Patrick Fitzgerald didn’t get a byline.

Then there is our health-care system, in which no bells and whistles went off amid such flagrant fraud. It took five years to figure it out. It’s enough to give a taxpayer heart palpitations.