The federal government’s September 11th Victim Compensation Fund began taking registrations Monday from people who believe they were physically harmed by the terrorist attacks and who are seeking financial compensation.

Registration — by providing basic information like a name, address and email address — is the first step toward filing a claim for financial damages. The fund was reopened by the passage of the James Zadroga 9/11 Health and Compensation Act of 2010, which put $2.8 billion in the fund to compensate people with health problems related to the terrorist attacks.

The next and perhaps trickiest step will be for people who register to prove that they were actually present in the attack areas during the period covered by the fund — Sept. 11, 2001, to May 30, 2002 — and that they suffered physical harm as a direct result of the attacks and the plane crashes at the World Trade Center and the Pentagon and in Shanksville, Pa. Psychological harm is not covered by the fund, though people with mental health troubles related to the attacks can seek treatment at government expense if their insurance does not cover it.

Officials have said that few good records were kept of those who worked at ground zero or passed through. Many of them were private contractors or volunteers who spontaneously found their way there.

It may also be a challenge for people who lived near ground zero to dig up records of their presence there as long as a decade ago.

Sheila Birnbaum, the special master for the fund, said Monday that the acceptable proof would include rent and other housing records, a badge that was used to gain admittance to the rescue and recovery area, employment records or, in the absence of any other documentation, affidavits from witnesses.

“There is a list of documents that people are going to need that are listed on the Web site, so people can start putting materials together that they’re going to need in order to attach to their applications,” Ms. Birnbaum said.

The registration, which can be done online at the fund’s newly created Web site or on paper, will give officials some idea of who might be seeking compensation, and will set up a channel of communication between the fund and those people, Ms. Birnbaum said.

Those eligible are “any individual (or a personal representative of a deceased individual) who suffered physical harm or was killed as a result of the terrorist-related aircraft crashes of Sept. 11, 2001, or the debris removal efforts that took place in the immediate aftermath of those crashes,” according to the fund’s Web site.

The “exposure zone” for residents and others in Lower Manhattan is south of Canal Street from the Hudson River to the intersection of Canal Street and East Broadway, north on East Broadway to Clinton Street and east on Clinton Street to the East River, but the special master reserves the right to make some exceptions.

After registering, people will be asked to submit their proof of eligibility beginning in November, Ms. Birnbaum said. If they are found to be eligible, they will invited to complete a compensation form, which will be used to determine how much they are owed in damages. The compensation form is still being created and tested, she said.

People who are now suffering from an illness that they attribute to the terrorist attacks have until Oct. 3, 2012, to file a claim. Others have two years from the date on which they know “or should have known of the condition for which they seek compensation,” according to the Web site. The fund will stop accepting claims in 2016.

Ms. Birnbaum said that she was trying to make the process easy enough to be followed without the help of a lawyer. But she said that for those who felt more comfortable using a lawyer, she was trying to recruit lawyers from the New York City bar association and elsewhere to serve without charge. Otherwise, the lawyer’s fee is limited to 10 percent of the award.

In approving the fund, Congress authorized a long list of breathing, digestive, muscle and skeletal disorders to be covered. But although many first responders believe they got cancer as a result of their exposure to toxic substances in the debris at ground zero, the government is still studying whether to include cancers among the illnesses that will be covered.

This is a second iteration of a fund that originally operated from 2001 to 2004, which covered people who died or were injured during the attacks. The new fund vastly expands the pool of eligible victims by recognizing that some people got sick — and may continue to get sick — long after the attacks were over.

People who applied to the original fund are eligible for this one in some circumstances, such as if they suffered a new injury, or their condition got worse than anticipated or their condition was not covered by the original fund.