Rick Perry and Mitt Romney, two of the leading candidates right now for the Republican presidential nomination, have declared themselves fiercely opposed to President Obama’s health care reform.

But what about their own records as governors addressing their residents’ health needs?

During his 11 years as governor of Texas, Mr. Perry has shown a shocking lack of concern for low- and moderate-income Texans who can’t afford health insurance or who have to struggle to keep it. His bromides about less government, more free-market and more self-reliance have neither held down costs nor made Texans healthier. Despite that record, he seems determined to carry that approach into the White House if elected.

Mr. Romney, in his four years as Massachusetts governor, played a major role in formulating sweeping health care reform that has shown remarkable success in expanding coverage at tolerable cost. After running away from that record in his 2008 campaign for the nomination, he has now embraced it as right for Massachusetts — but not for the nation. Voters will have to decide whether his hypocrisy would follow him into the White House and really lead him to undo the national reforms.

The differing results for residents of Massachusetts and Texas are clear. A scorecard compiled by the Commonwealth Fund in 2009 showed that Massachusetts ranked first among 50 states and the District of Columbia in the percentage of children and the percentage of adults below Medicare age who had health insurance. Texas was last in both categories. Based on 38 indicators covering such factors as access to treatment and quality of care, Massachusetts ranked seventh over all and Texas 46th.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

No matter how hard Mr. Romney tries to distance himself from “Obamacare,” the Massachusetts reforms were a template for the national reform legislation. The state achieved near-universal coverage by requiring most people to obtain insurance or pay a penalty and by providing subsidies to help low- and moderate-income people buy private insurance on new exchanges.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The reforms are popular among Massachusetts residents, business leaders and doctors. They drove up costs to the state budget only modestly and in accord with projections. The primary thing Massachusetts didn’t do was control the rising costs of delivering health care, a problem it is only beginning to address.