When Mr. Perry succeeded George W. Bush in December 2000, about 22 percent of Texans had no insurance, second only to New Mexico. After Mr. Perry’s decade in office, Texas now claims the highest uninsured rate, at 26 percent, as well as other distinctions like the lowest rate of prenatal care.

Regardless, Mr. Perry has offered few initiatives to extend coverage. Instead, under the banner of state sovereignty, he has waged a running battle against the ballooning cost and structure of Medicaid, which covers more than a third of Texas children. At various points, Mr. Perry and the Republican-controlled Legislature have cut Medicaid benefits and provider reimbursement rates and made enrollment more onerous.

“The governor believes that expanding government-sponsored insurance is not the answer,” said a spokeswoman, Catherine Frazier. “Nor is requiring people to purchase it. He looks to free-market solutions.”

Any failure to cover more Texans, Ms. Frazier said, is the federal government’s for declining, under Mr. Bush and Mr. Obama, to grant Mr. Perry’s requests to lift federal restrictions on Medicaid eligibility and benefits.

Rather than expanding public insurance, Mr. Perry sought to improve access by revamping the medical liability system. In 2003, he backed a successful measure that limited noneconomic damages against physicians and hospitals to a total of $750,000.

Mr. Perry boasted in New Hampshire last month that the law resulted in “21,000 more physicians practicing medicine in Texas,” attracting specialists to underserved counties.

But three law professors — Bernard Black of Northwestern University, David A. Hyman of the University of Illinois and Charles Silver of the University of Texas — find deep flaws in Mr. Perry’s calculations and conclude that the supply of practicing doctors actually increased at a slower rate after the 2003 changes than before.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In working papers, the researchers assert that tort reform significantly reduced the number and cost of liability claims. But they found no evidence that it slowed the growth of health care costs.

Mr. Perry has railed against the 2010 federal health law as “socialism on American soil” and strongly backs litigation challenging its requirement that most Americans, starting in 2014, obtain insurance.

But his state agencies have accepted nearly $20 million in grants authorized by the act, including $1 million to plan for the new insurance marketplaces known as exchanges. Nonetheless, Mr. Perry this year persuaded the Legislature to shelve a Republican bill to begin the planning process.

“He thought it would hurt our legal challenge to the law,” said State Representative John Zerwas, the measure’s sponsor. “And whether we like it or not, health insurance exchange has become synonymous with Obamacare, and there are political consequences to that.”

Video

Mr. Perry continues to pay a political price for one decision he made to impose a health care mandate — an executive order in 2007 that made Texas the first state to require young girls to be vaccinated against cervical cancer with Gardasil. The order infuriated conservatives, and the Legislature quickly passed a bill to overturn it, which Mr. Perry allowed to take effect without his signature.

The governor, whose former chief of staff was a lobbyist for Merck, the maker of Gardasil, defended his “pro-life decision” in a debate last year. But after announcing his bid for president last month, he began describing it as a mistake.

One day before Mr. Romney signed his landmark 2006 health care bill amid pomp at Faneuil Hall, he declared victory in a column in The Boston Globe: “Every uninsured citizen in Massachusetts will soon have affordable health insurance and the costs of health care will be reduced.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. Romney is batting .500.

For the 10 percent of residents who had been uninsured, the commonwealth’s coverage mandate, coupled with government subsidies for the poor, has proved a striking success. A study last year concluded that 98.1 percent of residents, and 99.8 percent of children, had health insurance, leading the country. The state also found, to the surprise of some, that the share of employers contributing to their workers’ coverage (rather than accepting a modest penalty for not doing so) had risen.

But the law was not intended to make a serious assault on the state’s above-average health costs. A recent state report concluded that growth in private insurance premiums since 2006 had outpaced the increase in national heath care spending.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In pushing for the law, which features an exchange and requires insurers to cover pre-existing conditions, Mr. Romney championed an insurance mandate as the “ultimate conservative idea.” The targets of his “personal responsibility principle” were the free-riders who gambled by not buying policies and then relied on taxpayers, hospitals and the privately insured to cover the cost of their uncompensated care.

Mr. Romney could not have known then that his legacy would become such a bludgeon, with Mr. Perry, Mr. Huntsman and, impishly, Mr. Obama crediting him for the blueprint of the federal overhaul.

Tax increases have been needed to keep the Massachusetts plan afloat. But they have not been back-breaking, largely because the federal government underwrites much of the subsidized coverage. Mr. Romney is quick to remind voters that the Democratic-led Legislature overrode his veto of the requirement that employers contribute to their workers’ coverage and of benefits he considered gold-plated.

As a national candidate, Mr. Romney has argued that the law was appropriate for Massachusetts but is constitutionally prohibited as a federal solution. He does not, however, disown it.

“I’m not going to back away from the fact that I signed that bill,” Mr. Romney said recently in New Hampshire.

In Utah, Mr. Huntsman was clearly intrigued by what Mr. Romney had achieved, and in 2007, his third year in office, he set a goal of cutting the number of uninsured in half by 2010. With about 17 percent of residents uninsured, the governor viewed expanded coverage as a way to lower costs for employers and stoke his state’s competitiveness.

He had already lifted a spending cap on the state’s Children’s Health Insurance Program, which allowed unlimited enrollment and contributed to declines in the number of young uninsured.

In 2007, he hired John T. Nielsen, a former hospital system lawyer, to investigate whether “we could replicate what Massachusetts had done,” Mr. Nielsen said. He also lent his aides to a high-powered working group convened by the United Way of Salt Lake that ultimately devised a plan that relied on an exchange and an individual mandate.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In at least two interviews that year, Mr. Huntsman described a mandate as necessary to achieving the kind of expansion he envisioned. “I think if you’re going to get it done and get it done right, mandate has to be part of it in some way, shape or form,” Mr. Huntsman told the public television station KUED.

But the governor’s top health advisers, including Mr. Nielsen and Dr. David N. Sundwall, his health commissioner, said Mr. Huntsman never expressed a preference for the mandate in their discussions. And once Greg Curtis, the House speaker at the time, informed Huntsman aides that the mandate would be a nonstarter in the Republican-controlled Legislature, Mr. Huntsman did not push back.

“He’s a pragmatic politician,” Mr. Sundwall said. “He said, ‘Then let’s go with what we can get.’ ”

The resulting package, enacted in 2008, featured a scaled-down exchange, available only to small businesses. It has attracted 165 employers covering 4,206 workers and dependents, one-fiftieth the number in the Massachusetts exchange.

As a presidential candidate, Mr. Huntsman gives little sense that he was ever open to an insurance mandate. Asked on CNN last month how he differed from Mr. Romney, he answered: “How about a free-market approach to health care reform instead of a heavy handed Obama-like mandate?”