Photo

Here are some of the more interesting items that the tech reporters and editors of The New York Times found on the Web recently. See more here.

Health care sector vulnerable to hackers, researchers say

The Washington Post | Medical records are not secure and have become a tempting target for identity thieves looking for personal information. — Damon Darlin

Look At All These Guns People Got for Christmas

theatlanticwire.com | Instagram proves to be useful for gun lobby — Somini Sengupta

Complain to Your Brother

buzzfeed.com | Randi Zuckerberg had a little Facebook privacy problem, it seems.– Suzanne Spector

Santa’s Privacy Policy

mcsweeneys.net | Santa issues his privacy policy. There is surveillance involved. — Damon Darlin

Facebook Funneled Nearly Half Billion Pounds Into Cayman Isle

businessinsider.com | Connecting the world but avoiding high-tax countries — Somini Sengupta

Facebook?! Twitter?! Instagram?! We Did That 40 Years Ago

wired.com | Think social media is new? Here’s a history lesson. — Brian X. Chen

A Rivalry for 2013

reuters.com | An analysis of Amazon vs. Google in the new year. — Suzanne Spector

A Third Dimension for Royalty

bbc.co.uk | Elizabeth II is to broadcast her first Christmas message in 3D. — Suzanne Spector

Phone Evolution

exp.lore.com | Western Electric, an arm of AT&T, predicted the future of the phone in this ad. (They came closer with the nail polish.) — Damon Darlin

I Just Played North Korea’s First Computer Game: Pyongyang Racer

techinasia.com | This appears to be North Korea’s first video game, a racing game that is eerily accurate: no traffic in Pyongyang. — Damon Darlin

How Food Genius Built the Ultimate Test Kitchen Out of Menu Data

gigaom.com | Want to know what the trending ingredients are? A database of 100,000 menus tells food industry what’s happening. — Damon Darlin

Foxconn Sees Strategic Boost From GoPro Camera-Maker Investment

Bloomberg | Foxconn (actuallly Hon Hai) investment in GoPro also makes the camera maker’s founder a billionaire. — Damon Darlin

How a Smartphone Can Be Used as a Deadly Weapon

vanityfair.com | It was Professor Plum in the library with the insulin pump he hacked with his smartphone. — Nicole Perlroth