The prescription drug program, known as Part D of Medicare, covers more than 30 million people who are 65 and older or disabled.

A separate study by university researchers found similar problems in many state Medicaid programs. The study, published this month in the journal JAMA Internal Medicine, described “inadequate management of conflicts of interest” among the panels that recommend drugs for coverage under Medicaid.

Medicare and Medicaid account for more than 30 percent of retail spending on prescription drugs. The inspector general examined the records of 111 panels that establish lists of preferred drugs, known as formularies, for Medicare’s prescription drug plans.

Ann Maxwell, a regional inspector general in Chicago who worked on the study, said: “We found very little oversight by the insurance companies and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. We found that the agency does not directly oversee insurance companies’ compliance with federal conflict-of-interest requirements.”

Some committees did not collect any personal financial information from panel members. “The members were required only to sign a form stating whether they had financial interests or conflicts of interest,” the report said.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

More than half of the committees did not have procedures to review the financial holdings of panel members to see if they had conflicts of interest, it said.

“Additionally,” the report said, “23 percent of pharmacy and therapeutics committees did not have recusal policies” requiring members to abstain from discussions or votes when they had conflicts of interest related to a particular drug.

Since Medicare officials do not monitor conflicts of interest, Mr. Levinson said, they cannot be sure that prescription drug plans are complying with federal requirements that at least two committee members — one practicing physician and one pharmacist — be “independent and free of conflict.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Marilyn B. Tavenner, the acting administrator of the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, defended her agency’s work and said beneficiaries were adequately protected.

The inspector general “did not identify any actual conflicts of interest,” she said, and “we do not believe it is necessary for us” to establish a uniform definition or standards for managing conflicts.

Ms. Tavenner, who has been nominated by President Obama to lead the agency, said Medicare officials reviewed each insurer’s list of covered drugs to make sure beneficiaries had access to a wide range of medications for various diseases.

The only effect of a conflict of interest, she said, is that premiums might be higher. “Beneficiaries could easily evaluate these higher premiums in the marketplace and choose a more efficient plan to meet their needs,” Ms. Tavenner said.

A few state Medicaid programs have conflict-of-interest policies more stringent than federal Medicare rules. Washington State, for example, says drug-selection committee members have a potential conflict if they have received “any remuneration, grants or other compensation from a pharmaceutical manufacturer or a pharmaceutical benefits management company.”

Benefit managers are often hired by insurers to obtain lower prices through negotiations with drug makers. When members of a drug-selection committee invest in a benefit manager, Mr. Levinson said, they have a potential conflict of interest because they stand to gain financially from decisions to cover a particular drug.