While the majority of foreign-trained doctors wishing to practice in this country are motivated and bright, the training outside this country often does not fully prepare them for what they will encounter as doctors in the United States.

Medicine in this country is complex, and there is significant variability in training programs elsewhere. Much of how medical care is provided in any part of the world is rooted in local and regional cultural standards, and mastering these standards can be achieved only by total immersion in that system of medical care over time and under strict supervision.

This invaluable experience is what medical training programs in the United States provide for these foreign-trained doctors who desire to practice here. It would be a disservice to patients and to these talented physicians to create pathways to medical practice that do not include an accredited training program.

JASON R. ORLINICK

Fairfield, Conn., Aug. 12, 2013

The writer, an internist, is chief of hospital medicine at Norwalk Hospital.

To the Editor:

The only reason I would go and see foreign-trained physicians in this country is the requirement that they complete the “long slog” to relicensing. Training is woefully inadequate in developing nations. I know this is true for India, as I came from there to the United States more than a decade ago.

Photo

Though I would love to see more immigrants be successful and contribute to society here, we will be playing with fire if everyone with a degree anywhere in the world is automatically allowed to practice medicine in the United States.

PRANAB MUKHERJEE

Beachwood, Ohio, Aug. 12, 2013

The writer is an assistant professor of medical mycology at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

To the Editor:

A simple policy change — equalizing the licensing requirements for doctors educated abroad and those educated in the United States — would end current physician shortages in half of the states within five years.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But state regulators are standing in the way of this solution. Our research shows that states with self-financing medical boards, those less subject to public scrutiny, impose stricter licensing requirements.

We also examined the effects of state medical board regulations that require foreign-educated physicians to complete up to two more years of medical residency than their counterparts educated in this country.

Our analysis of immigration records from 1973 to 2010 found that immigrant physicians are less likely to settle in states with the most stringent requirements, states that often have the greatest need for doctors.

SONAL PANDYA

DAVID LEBLANG

Charlottesville, Va., Aug. 12, 2013

The writers are, respectively, an assistant professor and a professor of politics at the University of Virginia.

To the Editor:

I am an intensive-care pediatrician trained in Australia and Britain. I moved to New York in 2010 and was told, as were the foreign-educated doctors in your article on the ordeal that we must endure to receive a United States medical license, that I would have to complete the usual tests and a residency thereafter.

So I completed the licensing exams and secured a plum residency, in anesthesiology at Cornell. But the prospect of spending 4 years and 80 hours a week on tedious, low-level work away from my family was unbearable, and I withdrew.

Months later, almost by chance, I discovered an alternative route to a medical license. I submitted an application to the New York State Department of Education demonstrating that my overseas medical training was equivalent to or better than what I would have obtained in the United States. Last month, after the department verified my postgraduate training, my license arrived in the mail. No residency required.

ANNIE SPARROW

New York, Aug. 12, 2013

The writer is deputy director, human rights program, and assistant professor of global health at Mount Sinai’s Icahn School of Medicine.