Under the law, Mr. Cantor said, the I.R.S. “will have access to the American people’s protected health care information.” Privacy concerns are justified, he said, because “this same agency has illegally disclosed protected taxpayer information.”

But Representative Sander M. Levin of Michigan, the senior Democrat on the Ways and Means Committee, said, “Neither the I.R.S. nor the Department of Health and Human Services will have access to medical records or other personal history, no access whatsoever.”

Mr. Levin said that Republicans, in their zeal to undo the health care overhaul, were neglecting other important issues.

“This bill is nothing more than a continuation of the Republicans’ blind obsession with repealing the Affordable Care Act,” Mr. Levin said. “Their mission is to destroy, not implement, health care reform.”

Four Democrats — Representatives John Barrow of Georgia, Jim Matheson of Utah, Mike McIntyre of North Carolina and Collin C. Peterson of Minnesota — crossed party lines and voted for the bill. No Republicans voted against it.

Separately, Mr. Obama came to the rescue of members of Congress and their aides on Friday, saying that the federal government would continue paying a large share of their health insurance premiums. Ambiguous provisions of the health care law had created serious doubts about whether such contributions would continue.

Under the arrangement devised by the administration, lawmakers and aides who work in their personal offices will have to get coverage through new state-based markets known as insurance exchanges.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. Obama has said that he will get health insurance through an exchange. And the White House said Friday that he would support legislation putting cabinet officers and members of the White House staff into the marketplaces as well.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Lawmakers and their aides, like many federal workers, generally receive coverage through the popular Federal Employees Health Benefits Program. The government pays roughly 70 percent of premiums, contributing $5,000 a year for individual coverage and $11,000 for family coverage under some of the most popular plans.

The 2010 law generally requires lawmakers and thousands of their aides to get coverage through the exchanges. It does not provide any obvious way for the federal government to continue paying its share of the premiums.

The House Democratic leader, Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, said that this provision of the law, aimed mainly at lawmakers, threatened “collateral damage” to staff members.

“Staff did tell me that there would be a problem,” Ms. Pelosi said. “And it was a good opportunity for us to pay tribute to the staff and all that they mean to the workings of Congress. They are a tremendous intellectual resource. They could, shall we say, be better compensated financially outside. Happily they enjoy the psychic rewards of public service.”

Some aides, fearing the loss of federal contributions to their premiums, had begun to look for other jobs.

The Office of Personnel Management, which administers health benefits for federal employees, will provide details of the new arrangement in a proposed regulation to be issued next week.

Under the rule, a White House official said, members of Congress and certain Congressional employees “will enroll in marketplace plans, will not qualify for premium tax credits, and, like private sector employees, will not lose their employer contributions for these health plans.”

The Obama administration has not said how it will calculate the employer contributions. Congressional aides were told that the contributions would be no more than what lawmakers and their aides currently receive under the federal employees health program.

Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, said: “Congress should live under the laws it creates. That includes Obamacare. And if the exchanges actually go into effect, Congress should pass a law to put White House and Congressional leadership in the exchanges.”