THOMAS M. CASSIDY

Stony Brook, N.Y., Feb. 18, 2013

The writer, an economist, is a clinical associate professor of social welfare at Stony Brook University and a former senior investigator for the New York State attorney general’s Medicaid Fraud Control Unit.

Readers React

Canada’s Medicare program — phased in at the same time as the American version — shows how we can make Medicare simpler and thriftier, while simultaneously upgrading its coverage. Canada’s program covers all Canadians (not just the elderly) under a single public program in each province, and bans co-payments and deductibles.

Patients can choose any doctor and hospital. Cutting out private insurers and the complexity and fragmentation they impose has simplified paperwork for patients, doctors and hospitals. Administrative costs are roughly half United States levels, saving more than $1,000 per capita.

Over all, Medicare spending on the elderly has grown three times faster in the United States than in Canada since 1980, while life expectancy (for the elderly, as for all age groups) has grown faster in Canada. If American Medicare costs had risen at Canadian rates, we’d have saved more than $2 trillion by now, and Medicare’s trust fund would show a healthy surplus.

STEFFIE WOOLHANDLER

DAVID U. HIMMELSTEIN

New York, Feb. 20, 2013

The writers, internists and professors at the CUNY School of Public Health at Hunter College, co-founded Physicians for a National Health Program.

As a professional and a Medicare subscriber, I have found the program’s customer service to be unfailingly efficient and polite. I could never say the same for private insurers. I agree with Mr. Cassidy that rather than cut Medicare, we can change it, but I believe that I might differ in how.

Our Congress can change Medicare if it is serious about real savings. How many billions would it save to cut all subsidies for Medicare Advantage plans; allow Medicare to negotiate drug prices for Medicare Part D with pharmaceutical companies; and take for-profit companies out of Part D entirely?

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Medicare is seamless in paying my fees, and paying for care when I need it. The fees Medicare pays are very low, and cutting them further is not a good cost-cutting maneuver. It hurts small businesses like mine and that of my primary care physician; both of us have the same expenses we have always had.

Medicare could run its own show with no private subsidies to for-profit entities. We seniors would be better off.

VIRGINIA D. REIBER

Boston, Feb. 20, 2013

The writer is a clinical psychologist.

Mr. Cassidy’s proposed fix is sensible but is far short of what is needed.

Medicare is headed for bankruptcy because it depends largely on open-ended fee-for-service payment of almost any services providers choose to deliver, at prices mainly determined by the providers. Compounding the problem, most providers act like independent businesses seeking to increase their income, regardless of whether they are for-profit or investor-owned.

An effective Medicare fix would require a new payment system that prospectively pays providers for comprehensive care at a rate set by a single public payer. It would also need a not-for-profit medical care system based on multispecialty doctor groups that pay physicians by salary, thus minimizing incentives to deliver duplicative or unnecessary care.

The new system would have to be mandatory for all citizens, including legislators, and it would have to be financed by a progressive, earmarked health care tax.

Obviously, such reform would be slow and difficult, but so would any other change that threatened vested interests. All reform will depend on an aroused public opinion.

Photo

ARNOLD S. RELMAN

Tucson, Feb. 21, 2013

The writer is professor emeritus of medicine and social medicine at Harvard Medical School and a former editor in chief of The New England Journal of Medicine.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Medicare suffers from an economic “tragedy of the commons.” Every stakeholder in the Medicare program has an incentive to overuse the system for his own benefit. In the end, when exploitation of Medicare exceeds its finite capacity, the resource is destroyed.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The Medicare patient has an incentive to accept expensive treatment because it seems to be free and is enthusiastically recommended by the physician. The physician has an incentive to offer high-cost services because she is paid well to do so. Compensate physicians on almost any basis other than piecework fee-for-service, and you remove the incentive to overtreat.

In the end, the appetite of Americans for Medicare treatment will always exceed the capacity of the Medicare system to provide it while controlling costs. By any other name, cost containment requires rationing (limitation) of services.

Rationing medical services is not itself immoral. Some methods of rationing are often inequitable. After all, we ration by a person’s ability to afford insurance. The most effective rationing is achieved when an unnecessary medical service is neither requested by the patient nor recommended by the physician. Properly structuring incentives makes this more likely.

THOMAS SHAPIRO

San Jose, Calif., Feb. 20, 2013

The writer is a retired surgeon.

Mr. Cassidy’s plea to simplify the rules for gaining access to Medicare benefits makes good sense, but doing so will not be enough to “fix Medicare.”

The greatest threat to Medicare’s continued ability to serve elderly and disabled Americans is its failure so far to contain its spending. Indeed, the failure to contain health care costs is a characteristic of the American health care system as a whole.

A multipronged approach can help reach the goals of more reliable quality of care and lower costs: paying providers to care for patients instead of to provide individual services; electronic medical records and other advances that can increase the probability that the services doctors recommend will really benefit patients; and new provider organizations — accountable care organizations — that take responsibility for the health of the patients who enroll with them.

This strategy can both improve the quality of services provided and bring health system costs under control. It will take time, and it won’t be easy.

Providers and patients alike will need to learn from unfolding experience. If successful, the payoff will be durable improvements not only to Medicare but to the American health care system as a whole.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

STEPHEN M. DAVIDSON

Brookline, Mass., Feb. 21, 2013

The writer, a professor at the Boston University School of Management, is the author of the forthcoming book “A New Era in U.S. Health Care: Critical Next Steps Under the Affordable Care Act.”

Mr. Cassidy discusses various problems facing Medicare, in particular its solvency and transparency. With respect to the first issue, it may be worth noting that any remnant of personal responsibility is completely lacking in the program.

There are numerous health problems that are a result of lifestyle choices, including emphysema (smoking) and obesity (lack of exercise and poor eating habits). But Medicare pays regardless of the cause.

If one burns down his own house, insurance payments are generally withheld. Withholding such payments for problems caused by irresponsible behavior would have two effects. There would be an immediate savings in Medicare costs, while in the long run people would be healthier, their poor choices no longer being subsidized.

Such an approach may appear draconian to some, but all the low-lying fruit has already been picked. Eventually, difficult choices have to be made.

WILLIAM VAUGHAN Jr.

Chebeague Island, Me., Feb. 20, 2013

The Writer Responds

As Drs. Woolhandler and Himmelstein say, there are lessons in efficiency and simplicity to be learned from Canada’s single public health program, which provides coverage for all Canadians. But after the polarizing campaign that resulted in the passage of the Affordable Care Act, legislators in the United States have sent a clear message that the fragmentation in the health care system, like Medicare, Medicaid and private insurance, will remain in place for the foreseeable future.

As a result, Medicare cannot rely on a single-payer system to rescue it from dysfunction. Instead, Medicare can and must make meaningful changes for beneficiaries and providers alike. As I said before, Medicare should be simple to use, easy to understand and affordable for beneficiaries. But reform must also include cost containment to save Medicare for future generations.

Although the new types of payment systems recommended independently by Professor Davidson and Dr. Relman provide a far better approach for controlling skyrocketing costs than today’s fee-for-service model, these types of fundamental reforms are uncertain and take time.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Medicare must immediately reduce its risk for exploitation, whether by outright fraud or billing for medically unnecessary services. Medicare processes more than four million claims each business day from 1.5 million providers. Trying to identify all of the bogus claims submitted to Medicare is an insurmountable challenge.

Therefore, to protect the integrity of the program, Medicare must raise enrollment standards so that only first-rate professionals and businesses with established credentials can earn the privilege to participate in the program.

The time to act is now; time is not on our side.

THOMAS M. CASSIDY

Stony Brook, N.Y., Feb. 21, 2013