Medical Data Management: Listening to Patients

TO THE EDITOR:

Re “Repeating the Mistakes of History” (Hard Cases, Oct. 20): Dr. Abigail Zuger is dead on. Electronic medical records do a great job of creating a billable document. But all too often the big picture is buried in the scattered profusion of data and identical cut-and-paste notes. And during the appointment the computer competes for the attention of the physician. I also have to refer to the screen at times, but as a psychiatrist I have clung to 1) jotting things down with an actual pen while people tell me their stories face–to-face, and then 2) dictating my notes, which is fast and individualized, and allows me to review the visit in my mind one more time as I speak.

Lisa Hunter, M.D.Madison, Wis.

TO THE EDITOR:

How refreshing to read that the old-fashioned virtue of detailed medical history taking, pen in hand, still has its champions. I am reminded of the advice given to medical students by Dr. William Osler, a master diagnostician who practiced long before the era of modern technology: Doctor, listen to your patient — he is telling you the diagnosis.

Stanley F. Wainapel, M.D.Bronx

Mental Health: Ways to Ease a Burden

TO THE EDITOR:

“Compulsions That Cannot Be Ignored” (Personal Health, Oct. 14) highlights the fact that too few patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder receive appropriate therapy. We wish to add that patients who have difficulty complying with rigorous cognitive behavioral therapy schedules may achieve major benefit from pharmacotherapy. Also, missing from the description of therapies is neuromodulation for those with the most severe and intractable forms of O.C.D. Deep brain stimulation is a neurosurgical treatment that can provide dramatic improvement when medications and cognitive behavioral therapy are ineffective. While appropriate for only a few, deep brain stimulation is an important part of the therapeutic landscape.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Charles H. Kellner, M.D.Wayne K. Goodman, M.D.Manhattan

Brain Development: Teenagers and the Law

TO THE EDITOR:

Re “Too Young to Know Better” (Oct. 14): As commissioners of city agencies entrusted with ensuring the well-being of young people involved in the justice system, we believe Jan Hoffman’s discussion of adolescent brain development provides important support to New York’s justice reform.