While the typical doctor earned only about $1,750 from August to December 2013, a more elite group brought in considerably more for such activities, the data shows. At least 130 doctors, out of about 32,000 named in the database, earned more than $100,000. The database did not include the names of about 40 percent of the payment records because the federal government is still trying to verify their accuracy.

Photo

Although the database also includes payments for research, royalties and other activities, ethicists particularly scrutinize the money doled out for speaking and consulting payments. They argue that these relationships can influence prescribing behavior and negatively affect patients, especially when such ties are lucrative.

“Social scientists will tell you that any amount of money will influence people, but I think larger sums can influence behavior more,” said Dr. Aaron S. Kesselheim, an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women’s Hospital.

The list of doctors who earned more than $100,000 in speaking and consulting fees includes practitioners of diverse backgrounds and interests who were paid by drug and device makers for a variety of reasons. Dr. David Kessler, who was the commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration in the 1990s, was paid more than $200,000; the money, he said, was for serving on the board of Aptalis, a pharmaceutical company that is now owned by Actavis.

Some high-earning doctors were actually being paid for research, even though their fees were not recorded that way.

Still others are practicing physicians who maintain busy practices and earn a secondary income traveling the country — and sometimes the world — speaking and consulting for pharmaceutical and device companies. Dr. Geoffrey H. Westrich, an orthopedic surgeon at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, received more than $247,000 from companies that make hip, knee and spine products, including more than $100,000 from Exactech, a maker of implant devices and other surgical materials. According to his website, Dr. Westrich performs hundreds of hip and knee replacements each year. An assistant in his office said he was in surgery and was not available for an interview.

Dr. James Januzzi Jr., a cardiologist at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, earned more than $328,000 for speaking and consulting assignments, mainly from the drug maker Boehringer Ingelheim, according to the federal data. Dr. Januzzi did not return a call and email for comment. A spokesman for Massachusetts General said that the hospital has rigorous policies requiring disclosure and review of outside activities of its staff, and that it limits the types of outside activities that it permits.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Dr. Bradley Bengtson, a plastic surgeon in Grand Rapids, Mich., earned more than $300,000, mostly from Allergan, which makes a range of cosmetic surgery products, including Botox and a new breast implant, the Natrelle 410.

Lucrative Relationships Pharmaceutical and medical device companies made payments of about $3.5 billion to doctors and other health care professionals in the five-month period from Aug. 1 to Dec. 31, 2013. PURPOSE AMOUNTS Research payments $1.49 billion Ownership interest 1.02 billion Speaking and consulting fees 380 million Royalties and licenses 302 million Travel, food, lodging 167 million Other 128 million $3.48 billion TOTAL

During the five-month period covered by the new database, Dr. Bengtson traveled to San Diego, Las Vegas, Florida and Seoul, South Korea, to teach doctors how to use the new implant. He also devotes an entire page on his website to the Natrelle, which is nicknamed the “gummy bear implant” because of its glutinous consistency.

Dr. Bengtson said that any time he spends not treating patients represents lost revenue, “Although to many it looks like a lot of money, it actually is about one-tenth of the money that I’m not being compensated for being out of the office,” he said. Dr. Bengtson added that a significant portion of the money was actually for research and what he described as “pass-through” money that he gave to patients for participating in studies.

Like other physicians, Dr. Bengtson said he did the work mainly to help educate other doctors. “When I present, I present very transparently,” he said in an interview.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

But Dr. Kesselheim, of Harvard, questioned the value of company-sponsored presentations. “It provides a very narrow educational experience,” he said.

It has also sometimes led to ethical lapses, where doctors with financial interests in companies do not fully disclose them.

One high-earning doctor, Dr. Barry Weinstock of Leesburg, Fla., did not disclose a payout of more than $100,000 in a recent journal article. He received the money in August 2013 after a company that he had invested in, Idev Technologies, was acquired by the device company Abbott.

In September of last year, Dr. Weinstock, a cardiologist, submitted an article to a medical journal in which he briefly mentioned an Idev product, the Supera stent, in a favorable light.

Photo

Dr. Weinstock did disclose his ties to two other products that were more prominently mentioned in the article, in Vascular Disease. But he said that he did not believe he needed to mention the payout from Idev because he mentioned its product only in passing. “I was not advocating the use of the Supera stent,” he said in an interview, referring to the Idev product. “It was merely mentioned in the background of the article, and I wasn’t actually suggesting that anybody use it.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Some medical ethicists said that although Dr. Weinstock’s failure to disclose his tie was a minor one, he most likely should have mentioned it.

Bill Norton, the president of HMP Communications, which publishes the journal, said Dr. Weinstock did not disclose the connection. After he was contacted by a reporter, he said that he had investigated the issue and was correcting the disclosure.

Dr. Weinstock also speaks and consults for a range of companies, including the device companies W. L. Gore, Boston Scientific and the drug maker Eli Lilly. Like Dr. Bengtson, he said he lost money when he gave speeches, but he acknowledged that it carried other benefits. “For your own personal career and your own practice, there’s a benefit to being viewed as someone who is an expert and leader in the field,” he said.

Another doctor, Michael B. Wood, the former chief executive of the Mayo Clinic Foundation, earned more than $237,000 last year from serving on the boards of two separate medical companies.

Dr. Wood, who helped draft some of Mayo’s conflict of interest policies when he was chief executive, retired about a decade ago and still works occasionally in Mayo’s Jacksonville, Fla., clinic.

“Anytime I was asked to be on a public board, I turned it down until I was retired,” he said in an interview. Dr. Wood also said that the payment data in the federal database sounded “a little high.”

Mayo has tightened its rules in recent years about how much employees can earn from outside board positions after hearing reports of potential conflicts at other health care institutions, according to Dr. Richard L. Ehman, a professor of radiology who helps oversee Mayo’s conflict of interest policies. “We’re constantly revisiting our policies in light of what we’re seeing,” he said.