Mrs. Smith underwent hernia surgery at Winn Army Community Hospital in Fort Stewart, Ga., one of 40 hospitals across the country run by the armed forces. Her case illustrates what outside experts and dozens of current and former military hospital workers interviewed by The New York Times call a signal failing in a system that cares for 1.35 million active-duty service members and their families, among others.

Put simply, they say, many of the hospitals are so small and the trickle of patients so thin that it compromises the ability of doctors and nurses to capably diagnose and treat serious illnesses, much less take on surgeries like Mrs. Smith’s.

Two-thirds of the hospitals last year served 30 or fewer inpatients a day — less than a third as many as the typical civilian hospital. Nine served 10 or fewer — so few that Dr. Lucian L. Leape, a leading patient-safety expert at the Harvard School of Public Health, said, “I think they should be outlawed.”

These small and underused hospitals are the focus of an evolving Pentagon plan to scale back the system — entirely separate from the scandal-plagued veterans health system — by converting some of them into either outpatient clinics or birthing centers. The downsizing plan has not been made public, but Winn was among the hospitals listed in a draft distributed internally last spring and obtained by The Times.

The backdrop for the downsizing is a fiscal crisis. Four years ago, Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates said health care costs were “eating the Defense Department alive”; last year, they represented almost 10 percent of the defense budget. Close to half of the beds in military hospitals appear to sit vacant, significantly more than the civilian hospital average.

Behind those fiscal woes, though, is a hospital system at odds with itself, struggling with conflicting missions that, according to many people interviewed, put not just the Pentagon’s coffers but the quality of care and patient safety at risk.

Pentagon health leaders say their hospitals’ paramount mission is military: to hone the skills that doctors and nurses will need in the carnage of combat. But their principal business is both broader and more mundane: They are essentially community hospitals, providing a smorgasbord of low-cost primary and specialty care, from births to breast implants to appendectomies.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Especially, but not only, at smaller hospitals, the military priorities undercut the day-to-day delivery of health care, doctors and nurses say.

Inexperienced doctors often assume outsize responsibilities because military policies encourage more experienced and ambitious clinicians to become administrators. Continuity, so crucial to medical care, is lost as hospital commanders and doctors, as well as patients, constantly rotate from post to post. The wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have taken an especially heavy toll: With many military doctors and nurses overseas, hospitals have been forced to shunt patients to civilian care, leaving empty beds and out-of-practice medical staffs.

Resistance to Proposed Cuts

To some veterans of the system, the inherent incongruities raise the question of whether, with limited exceptions, the military should even be in the hospital business.

“It’s a dangerous game,” said John Schafer, who served for eight years as deputy commander for clinical operations at Reynolds Army Community Hospital at Fort Sill in Oklahoma. “It is crazy that the military doesn’t say, hey, we are really good at outpatient medicine and this inpatient thing is out of our league.”

In February, Mr. Schafer left to become senior director of physician services at Comanche County Memorial Hospital, a 380-bed facility nearby. From his office, he can see the military hospital, which treats an average of just 13 patients a day.

“I loved that place,” he said. “But it should not be a hospital. I retired because I could see the unsafe care. Nobody was listening.”

Since late May, partly in response to months of inquiries from The Times, the Pentagon has been conducting a systemwide review of quality of care, patient safety and access to treatment. That report is expected soon, but hints of concern emerge from the draft downsizing plan. It warned that many military doctors, including general surgeons, were not busy enough to keep their skills sharp, and stated that medical literature demonstrated that bigger hospitals offered better care than smaller ones.

A Pentagon spokeswoman said that a review of some data did not find that the military’s smaller hospitals performed worse than its bigger hospitals. But in an interview, Dr. Jonathan Woodson, the Pentagon’s top health care official, said officials had to consider quality of care, along with cost and other factors, in deciding whether to downgrade a hospital with a low volume of patients.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Assessing the performance of the system’s diverse array of hospitals is difficult, largely because the Pentagon either does not collect or does not rigorously analyze some crucial data. What is more, some hospitals have too few patients to be measured on certain benchmarks of care.

In correspondence with The Times about their experiences at military hospitals, some patients praised their care, while others called it substandard. The most recent available data also highlight wide variations in the quality of two major realms of treatment — maternity care and surgery.

Compared with leading civilian hospitals, more than half of domestic military hospitals — including the five with the busiest maternity wards — performed poorly on one or more measures of harm to mothers or babies in 2011 and 2012. As The Times previously reported, half of the military hospitals whose surgical data are submitted for outside review had higher than expected rates of surgical complications.

Dr. Woodson, the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs, has called for better, safer care of maternity, surgical and other patients. “The people we serve expect us to improve,” he said in a message to military health care workers this summer.

Military hospitals perform worse than leading civilian hospitals in most safety categories involving maternity patients . . . . . . and some hospitals perform worse in multiple safety categories. Rate of complications Above civilian benchmark Over 2 times benchmark Trauma to infant during birth Postpartum hemorrhage Shoulder dystocia, harm to infant Maternal trauma with instruments Maternal trauma without instruments Walter Reed National Military Medical Center Bethesda, Md. Madigan Army Medical Center Tacoma, Wash. Bassett Army Community Hospital Fort Wainwright, Alaska Naval Medical Center Portsmouth, Va. Naval Medical Center San Diego Irwin Army Community Hospital Fort Riley, Kan. Bayne-Jones Army Community Hospital Fort Polk, La. Fort Belvoir Community Hospital Fort Belvoir, Va. Naval Hospital Camp Pendleton, Calif. Carl R. Darnall Army Medical Center Fort Hood, Tex. Martin Army Community Hospital Fort Benning, Ga. Tripler Army Medical Center Honolulu Mike O'Callaghan Federal Medical Center Nellis AFB, Nev. U.S.A.F. Hospital Langley Joint Base Langley-Eustis, Va. Naval Hospital Pensacola, Fla. Naval Hospital Camp Lejeune, N.C. Blanchfield Army Community Hospital Fort Campbell, Ky. David Grant Medical Center Travis AFB, Calif. Wright-Patterson Medical Center Dayton, Ohio Womack Army Medical Center Fort Bragg , N.C.

Discussing the cutback plans in a recent interview, he said that the military needed its own hospitals, but not as many.

“There will always be a need for a military health care system,” Dr. Woodson said. “We will always need platforms to train our people.” Nonetheless, he said, “Where we have hospitals was decided decades ago.”

As in the past, this latest effort to alter those decisions has begun to provoke resistance from the armed services and Congress. Already, the Pentagon has cut its downsizing list from 15 hospitals to eight. Even that outcome is in doubt.

Winn, where Irene Smith began her medical odyssey, was given a reprieve.

Mrs. Smith still receives some care there, for insurance reasons. At home, a short drive from the military base, she sleeps sitting up, propped up by pillows, in a downstairs bedroom. She struggles to climb the stairs. She can’t go to the grocery store alone because she can’t lift the bags. She cannot imagine who would employ her now.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“There is not a single day that goes by that I am not in pain,” said Mrs. Smith, whose husband served 16 years in six combat zones before he was discharged for medical reasons. “I want people to know how the military is treating the families of the soldiers who go overseas to fight. They are using us as guinea pigs.”

Competing Missions

The military hospital system is actually less a system than a collection of hospitals that, with a few exceptions, are run separately by the Army, the Navy or the Air Force. Its flagship is the sprawling and sophisticated Walter Reed National Military Medical Center in the Washington suburbs, but more typical are small hospitals like Winn and Reynolds. The military also operates 14 hospitals overseas.

The system reached its peak size during World War II and has been shrinking in fits and starts ever since. The competing missions remain, encapsulated in two striking statistics:

Only one domestic hospital — the San Antonio Military Medical Center, the system’s largest — operates a Level 1 trauma unit, where doctors and nurses see cases similar to those they would encounter in war zones, according to the Pentagon’s analysis.

At the same time, one of the military’s busiest medical practices is a staple of civilian health care — delivering babies, about 50,000 a year.

In the interviews, dozens of former and current medical staff members described how military prerogatives constantly challenged the quality of care.

The military insists that most hospital supervisors be military officers, even though civilians make up almost half of the staff. As more seasoned military doctors move up to desk jobs, junior physicians sometimes end up heading clinical departments just months after completing their residencies, doctors and nurses say.

“Our young docs don’t have senior docs mentoring them,” said Michael E. Menning, a health care administrator who retired from the Air Force in 2009 after 24 years. “We have orthopedic surgeons, brain surgeons, thoracic surgeons, urologists, all in administrative jobs.”

Partly out of frustration with the promotion system, most military doctors take civilian jobs soon after they have paid back in years of service what they owe for free medical education or training, according to two military personnel experts with the RAND Corporation, a research organization.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The attrition adds to the continuous flux created by the military’s rigid rotation policies. Like other military personnel, enlisted doctors and nurses — even chief medical officers or heads of nursing — typically move every few years. Army hospitals get a new commander every two years.

“You are constantly losing momentum, constantly losing traction, and that relates directly to patient safety and quality of care,” said one former hospital commander, who spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of retaliation. “What civilian health organization rotates their C.E.O. every two years? There is no continuity, no institutional memory.”

In the civilian world, hospital executives typically hold graduate degrees in business or health care management and are certified by a professional board, according to a report last year overseen by the RAND Corporation. By contrast, in 2012, fewer than half of Army hospitals were run by health care administrators. The rest were in the hands of doctors, nurses and a dentist, the report said.

“Health care is complex,” said Mr. Schafer, the former Fort Sill official. “This idea that the Army has that anybody can do it once you get promoted to colonel is ridiculous.”

Air Force hospitals were run by physicians whose formal preparation consisted of a two-week seminar, the report said. “They are filling the job of a hospital administrator with zero professional training except for that two-week course,” Colonel Menning said. “They are sharp docs, but they are not qualified to be running these hospitals.”

Since the last round of hospital closings, in 2005, wartime has further strained military care. Many patients had to be referred out of the system; others left of their own accord. That choice is reflected in survey after survey showing military beneficiaries more satisfied with civilian than military care, by margins of more than 20 percent.

Of the 8.2 million people whose health care was covered by the Defense Department last year, including military retirees who served more than 20 years and their families, only about 2.4 million were treated exclusively at military hospitals and clinics. And more than half of those were active-duty service members, who were required to use military care when available.

Some former high-ranking defense health officials argue that the military health care model no longer makes much sense.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“In general, I don’t think we should be running hospitals where other resources exist,” said Harold Koenig, who as surgeon general of the Navy in the mid-1990s oversaw its arm of the hospital network. “We can get our providers on the staffs of civilian hospitals.”

Research comparing the cost of military and civilian care is not conclusive, but the Pentagon’s own draft study argues that, on average, civilian care is actually cheaper, in part because the military’s hospitals are so underused. So even as it seeks to downsize, the Pentagon is also trying to recapture lost patients, especially at the larger hospitals.

“Patients have choices,” Dr. Woodson said last fall. “We need to be their provider of choice.”

In recent months, the military has ordered tens of thousands of beneficiaries accustomed to civilian care to switch to a primary-care doctor at a military hospital or clinic — or pay more out of pocket for insurance that covers civilian care.

Photo

But already, nurses at some major hospitals are complaining that the growing workloads threaten the quality of care. At Madigan Army Medical Center outside Tacoma, Wash., some medical workers have relayed their concerns to the Joint Commission, an independent body that accredits hospitals.

There are similar complaints at Womack Army Medical Center at Fort Bragg in North Carolina, where poor surgical infection controls temporarily jeopardized the hospital’s accreditation and led to repeated inspections this year by the Joint Commission. Several staff members, speaking anonymously for fear of retaliation, said the hospital had been forced to expand its pool of eligible patients by more than 8 percent while cutting its budget and civilian staff. In an internal memo to public affairs officers this summer, Pentagon officials said staffing cuts have not undermined patient safety or quality of care.

Matthew McLean, an Army diesel sergeant who served four tours in Iraq and Afghanistan, shifted his family to civilian care years ago.

In October 2007, his wife, April, then 25 and seven months into a high-risk pregnancy, went for a checkup at the Reynolds Army hospital at Fort Sill. According to her malpractice claim, nurses lost track of her baby’s heart rate for nearly an hour, but failed to recognize the unfolding emergency.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The head of the obstetrics and gynecology unit — a military doctor who had completed her residency just five months earlier — said she wanted to transfer Mrs. McLean to a civilian hospital better able to handle the situation, according to the couple. Before that could happen, the baby died.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In a meeting two weeks later with the hospital commander, Sergeant McLean said, he demanded to know why the obstetrician had not performed a cesarean section. “These were his exact words,” the sergeant recalled: “ ‘If we tried to do a C-section for every baby that went into distress, there would be no babies delivered vaginally.’ ” The government settled the couple’s malpractice claim for $250,000.

Sergeant McLean, who has been transferred repeatedly since then, must seek military health care if available. “As a result,” he said, “I go to the doctor very, very, very rarely.

“But my wife and my children, I pay out of pocket to send them off-post to a civilian doctor. I absolutely refuse, refuse to let them be seen by a military doctor ever again.”

‘Very Scary’ for Doctors

On his first day at Naval Hospital Lemoore in February 2010, Dr. James Verrees said, he warned a Navy captain that the hospital’s defibrillator was malfunctioning.

“He nodded and smiled,” he recalled.

Photo

That was an early indication, Dr. Verrees said, of the culture of complacency he found during his three years as staff obstetrician at the 22-bed hospital outside Fresno, Calif., which last year averaged just four inpatients a day.

Doctors’ pagers did not work, he said. A maternity unit nurse assigned to listen for alarms on fetal heartbeat monitors had a hearing impairment. Lab results could not be trusted.

But when he complained about the persistent lab errors at a staff meeting, he said, he was ordered to apologize in writing to the entire staff. “People notice that something is wrong, and they are told to mind their own business,” Dr. Verrees said.

Precisely how that affected Lemoore patients is hard to discern. Rates of death and readmission are the broadest gauges of hospital performance, but the military’s data make it impossible to judge individual hospitals by those measures. Some hospitals treat many more seriously ill patients than others, but the military does not adjust its statistics to reflect those differences. Nor does it track how many patients die after last-minute transfers to civilian care.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Even so, Dr. Verrees and another former Lemoore physician, speaking on the condition of anonymity for fear of career repercussions, said they found Lemoore’s record troubling. Case records, malpractice suits and interviews show a string of grievous outcomes in the six-year period ending last summer.

A 7-week-old died of congestive heart failure last year after what her parents described as delays and equipment difficulties at Lemoore. A 30-year-old woman was forced to undergo a hysterectomy that same year after suffering severe bleeding during an emergency cesarean section that lacerated her bladder and vagina. An active-duty servicewoman died in 2009 after medical workers missed the signs of necrotizing fasciitis, a dangerous bacterial infection. A retired officer died of appendicitis in 2007, two days after being told he had a hernia.

And shortly before that, Raquel Bradshaw, the wife of a Navy officer, lost her 6-year old son, Kristian.

The first grader had been admitted to Lemoore for five days for gastroenteritis and dehydration. A month later, Mrs. Bradshaw took him back twice in two days because he could not stop vomiting.

“I kept telling the doctor, this is not normal,” Mrs. Bradshaw said. “She told me to give him Gatorade.”

The third morning, Kristian collapsed unconscious at home. He was sped by ambulance to a nearby civilian hospital. He died of dehydration due to gastroenteritis — an outcome that experts say is vanishing in a nation with advanced medical care.

A Stanford University specialist in emergency medicine, who reviewed the case record, said mistakes in Kristian’s care at Lemoore “directly led to his death.” The government paid $250,000 for malpractice, the maximum allowed by California law, the family’s lawyer, C. Brooks Cutter, said.

“I just feel they screwed up completely,” Mrs. Bradshaw said.

According to Dr. Verrees, doctors and nurses at Lemoore were “scared to admit patients because they thought they would have a disaster.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“They would say, ‘Send people to the real hospital,’ ” he said, referring to a 142-bed civilian facility about 30 minutes away. “My thought was, if that is the real hospital, why do we keep this facility open?”

At some other small military hospitals, even senior staff members say they have repeatedly asked themselves the same question. “If you are a physician, it’s very scary,” said Mr. Schafer, the former deputy commander at Reynolds. “You decide you are going to admit your sick patient, but there is no I.C.U., no gastroenterologist, no pulmonologist, no pathologist. Nobody’s on call.”

But convincing hospital commanders of such hazards is another matter, he said, because they do not want their brief tenures to be marked by cuts in services. “They want to hold on to everything,” he said.

Photo

So do some higher-ups in the Pentagon’s health care bureaucracy. Faced with objections from the Army, the Navy and the Air Force, the Pentagon has backed away, at least for now, from downgrading seven of the 15 hospitals on its initial list. And that is far from the last word: The defense budget bill due to come before the Senate later this year includes a demand for an outside review that would prevent the Pentagon from streamlining the system for months to come, at least.

Bayne-Jones Army Community Hospital in western Louisiana illustrates the obstacles ahead. The 20-bed facility averages just 10 inpatients and two births a day. It also reports one of the military’s highest rates of mothers who hemorrhage after childbirth, a leading cause of maternal deaths. Pentagon and Army officials agreed this year that it should be turned into an outpatient clinic, according to the draft report.

But Senator Mary L. Landrieu of Louisiana, a Democrat, is fighting hard to postpone the changes, as is the local chamber of commerce. “The off-base hospitals cannot absorb the patient load,” said Michael D. Reese, the chamber’s president.

So far, Lemoore is the only hospital on the Pentagon’s list to convert to an outpatient clinic, according to Pentagon officials. In an interview, Rear Adm. C. Forrest Faison III, the Navy’s deputy surgeon general, said nearby civilian hospitals did not exist when Lemoore was built in 1961 but now can pick up inpatient care.

The Pentagon’s public affairs memo states that any cuts stem from insufficient demand, not “safety or quality issues.” Pentagon officials said privacy rules prohibited them from commenting on the treatment of individual patients.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Navy is in the process of limiting a second hospital at Oak Harbor, Wash., to outpatient and maternity care. Two more hospitals — Reynolds and Beaufort Naval Hospital in South Carolina — closed their emergency departments but still offer inpatient care. The other four — Bayne-Jones and Army base hospitals at Fort Knox in Kentucky, Fort Jackson in South Carolina and Fort Riley in Kansas — remain untouched.

Winn, 45 minutes from Savannah, Ga., was originally marked for cutbacks, including a halt to inpatient surgery. But the Army won more time to show that a full range of inpatient care was needed.

Since then, said one medical worker who spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of retaliation, doctors and nurses have come under pressure to admit patients who might otherwise have been referred to civilian care or treated as outpatients.

Like Dr. Verrees at Lemoore and Mr. Schafer at Reynolds, some Winn staff members are worried about the quality of care. They also believe that their concerns have not been heard. So, earlier this summer, several of them went over the hospital commander’s head and wrote anonymously to leading defense health officials, complaining about the treatment of several patients.

Among the patients discussed was Ibraham Torres, a 25-year-old soldier who died last December. In the letter, the medical workers asserted that Winn had waited too long to airlift Mr. Torres to a civilian hospital, acting only after he had a series of cardiac arrests.

Mr. Torres’s mother, Susana, said in an interview that “there was nothing they could do” at the civilian hospital. She said a military officer promised an inquiry, but warned her not to expect results for a year and a half.

“I never got a real explanation of what happened,” she said.

Lapses in Analysis

Winn conducted 4,457 surgeries last year. But the Pentagon submits surgical data for outside evaluation from only 17 of its largest hospitals, and Winn is not among them. So it was unclear if what happened to Mrs. Smith, the hernia patient, was a horrific exception or part of a pattern of poor surgical care.

An initial operation to repair a hiatal hernia, like Mrs. Smith’s, does not necessarily require a specialist, according to Dr. Carlos A. Pellegrini, an expert in gastrointestinal surgery at the University of Washington Medical Center. Although the procedure — called laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication — is considered advanced, he said, a general surgeon can perform it with proper training.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mrs. Smith’s first operation in September 2007, conducted by a general surgeon at Winn, went smoothly enough. But within nine months, the hernia had re-emerged. That is not uncommon, Dr. Pellegrini said, but a second repair is far more complex and “the province of the specialist.” Among other concerns, he said, the chances of injuring the patient’s stomach or esophagus rise significantly.

Dr. Charles H. Penn — a general surgeon — performed the second hernia repair in May 2008. Beforehand, Mrs. Smith said, he informed her that the second surgery would be riskier, but did not refer her to a specialist or discuss whether civilian care was an option. In his surgical notes, he wrote that during a “very difficult” procedure, he identified and sealed a perforation in Mrs. Smith’s stomach. Mrs. Smith later charged in a malpractice suit that Dr. Penn himself had perforated her stomach and after repairing it, failed to conduct a standard test to make sure he had succeeded.

Dr. Penn was off for the Memorial Day weekend, so Dr. Stephen W. Jarrard, another general surgeon who had completed his residency just three years before, took over Mrs. Smith’s care, according to the lawsuit. Returning to find Mrs. Smith in distress, Dr. Penn discovered a hole in her stomach during emergency exploratory surgery and removed part of the organ.

Photo

But Mrs. Smith continued to decline for six more days, battling infection and respiratory distress. She was hooked up to a ventilator, given a tracheotomy and finally — 13 days after Dr. Penn first operated — flown by helicopter to the Memorial University Medical Center in Savannah, where surgeons found her abdomen filled with murky brown fluid and pus.

They operated eight times in 11 days, and while they saved her life, they were finally forced to remove the rest of her stomach and connect her esophagus directly to her intestines. She remained at Memorial for seven weeks, much of the time so heavily sedated that she was barely conscious.

According to Mrs. Smith’s lawyer, Wilbur D. Owens III, government lawyers conceded that Dr. Jarrard had failed to recognize the postoperative complications. Dr. Jarrard lost his credentials at Winn and left for civilian practice. He blamed “a biased and unfair peer review process” in his Georgia medical licensing records.

But the lawyers insisted that the rest of Mrs. Smith’s care met medical standards, according to Mr. Owens. Dr. Penn, who continues to practice surgery at Winn, did not return phone calls for comment.

If a patient unexpectedly dies or suffers permanent harm, as Mrs. Smith did, the case is considered a “sentinel event.” Pentagon regulations require such events be reported to the Joint Commission for follow-up. And they require that hospitals thoroughly investigate not just whether an individual doctor or nurse failed to provide proper care, but whether its own procedures were at fault.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The inquiry, called a “root cause analysis,” might have addressed whether surgeons at Winn should have attempted Mrs. Smith’s operation. But there is no record of one in her case.

As The Times reported in June, that is typical of military hospitals. In fact, newly obtained statistics show that last year, the government paid 21 military patients more than $500,000 each to settle malpractice claims, an indication of “significant harm.” Yet hospitals identified only three as sentinel events, a pattern that has persisted for years.

In the interview, Dr. Woodson, the Pentagon’s top health official, said doctors and other military hospital workers know their limits. “The services have done a very good job of ensuring that complex cases are done at the right place,” he said, and “that the level of surgeries is appropriate.”

Two and a half years after the government settled Mrs. Smith’s lawsuit for just under $1 million, Winn faces a similar claim: Jamie Knestaut, a soldier’s wife, has charged that a flawed operation by a different surgeon nearly reduced her to the same condition as Mrs. Smith.

And she arrived at much the same conclusion: The surgeon, she said in her complaint, “used me as his own personal guinea pig.”

Photo

In March of last year, Mrs. Knestaut, 40, underwent a sleeve gastrectomy — an elective laparoscopic operation to reduce the size of her stomach, which she hoped would reduce her medical risks from being overweight.

During 16 months of “hell and uncertainty” that followed, she said, she was readmitted to Winn seven times because contents from her stomach were seeping into her abdomen. For months, she said, she was fed through a tube.

After a prolonged fight, she said, she forced the hospital to transfer her to civilian care. In July, also at Memorial in Savannah, Mrs. Knestaut was operated on once more. She said her surgeon warned her that there was only a 10 percent chance of saving her stomach.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

She was lucky; in his postoperative report, the surgeon wrote that after he cut away the leaking section of her stomach, he found plenty of healthy tissue left.

Nine days later, Mrs. Knestaut filed an administrative claim against the Army for medical malpractice, the first step toward a lawsuit. In a meeting this year with the hospital commander, she explained one reason.

“What about the next person?” she said.