The No. 1 prescriber of Acthar in Medicare in 2012, Dr. William Shaffer, said he gives speeches that draw on his experiences as both a neurologist and a patient with multiple sclerosis, a condition that Acthar treats.

Photo

“I was and still am an M.S. patient and have seen not only my personal results but other patients that have responded amazingly,” Dr. Shaffer said.

The Los Angeles neurologist Regina Berkovich, the No. 2 prescriber, with 38 prescriptions in 2012 in Medicare, has received research funds from Questcor and has spoken on behalf of the company. She did not return phone calls and emails seeking comment.

Several of Medicare’s other top prescribers of Acthar have blemishes on their records. For example, the Michigan neurologist Gavin Awerbuch, the most frequent prescriber of the drug in 2011, was charged in May with health care fraud and distributing a controlled substance. He has not yet entered a plea. He could not be reached, and his lawyer did not return phone calls and emails.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The neurologist Sean Orr, who has given promotional talks for the drug but was not a top prescriber, had his medical license suspended last year by Florida, which determined that he had sex with a patient. A civil whistle-blower lawsuit filed in 2012 in United States District Court in Jacksonville, Fla., also accuses Dr. Orr of misdiagnosing healthy patients with neurological diseases, including multiple sclerosis, so he could bill for their treatment and prescribe expensive medications. That lawsuit is pending. He could not be reached for comment.

Questcor declined to answer questions for this article. Its public relations firm issued a statement saying that Questcor’s promotional activities were “in line with industry best practices” and that it adhered to federal standards.

ProPublica has reported previously on ties between Medicare’s top prescribers of expensive drugs and the makers of those drugs. A 2007 report in The New York Times examined the relationship between drug company payments to psychiatrists in Minnesota and prescriptions of antipsychotic drugs for children in the Medicaid program.

Last year, ProPublica reporters identified the drugs that were most actively promoted to doctors in 2010 and 2011 using rankings from Cegedim Strategic Data, a company that tracks marketing expenses. Seventeen of the top 20 Medicare prescribers of the blood pressure drug Bystolic in 2010 received speaking payments from Forest Laboratories, the company that makes it. Nine of the top 10 prescribers of the Alzheimer’s drug Exelon received money from Novartis, the drug’s maker. And eight of the top 10 for Johnson & Johnson painkiller Nucynta were paid speakers.