“They feel an extreme breach of faith, breach of trust and betrayal,” he said. Many former patients “have dropped out of the medical system,” he said, adding that they now refuse to see doctors or take their children to pediatricians out of mistrust.

The civil suit charged the hospital with invasion of privacy, emotional distress and negligence in its oversight of Dr. Levy, who practiced in a community clinic in East Baltimore run by the giant hospital system.

In a statement on Monday, the hospital said it hoped that the settlement, along with law enforcement findings that the images were not shared, “helps those affected achieve a measure of closure.”

The statement from the hospital, one of the nation’s leading academic centers of medicine and a large community health care provider, added: “We assure you that one individual does not define Johns Hopkins. Johns Hopkins is defined by the tens of thousands of employees who come to work determined to provide world-class care for our patients and their families.”

Photo

Initially, the hospital identified nearly 12,700 patients Dr. Levy might have seen in his 25 years as an employee. Investigators estimated that he began recording patients with tiny cameras hidden in a pen or a key fob around 2005.

“Words cannot describe how deeply sorry we are for all this has affected,” two top officials of Johns Hopkins wrote to former patients last year. “We are terribly sorry this has happened and for the distress you must be feeling.”

After Dr. Levy’s colleague reported him, hospital security officers confronted him in his office, and he turned over several cameras. A hospital statement at the time said that he was told to seek counseling and was escorted off the premises. Johns Hopkins contacted the Baltimore police and fired the doctor on Feb. 8, 2013.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Although law enforcement agencies concluded that Dr. Levy had not uploaded any of the images online or shared them with others, Mr. Schochor is not so sure. He cited retired F.B.I. experts whom he hired as consultants for the lawsuit. “I think there’s overwhelming probability” that Dr. Levy shared images, Mr. Schochor said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

His law firm, Schochor, Federico & Staton, which specializes in medical malpractice, interviewed about 2,000 former patients. He said many of the women described disturbances in work and their personal lives after learning of the recordings.

“There’s been a huge, devastating result to this whole thing,” Mr. Schochor said. “Many have had changes in their ability to focus, problems with sleeplessness. Some have had changes in their relationships with spouses and significant others.”

James A. Wells, the chairman of a medicine and law committee for the American Bar Association, said $190 million was “a very large number for the settlement of medical malpractice claims involving a single physician.”

Other cases involving doctors who secretly recorded patients have also drawn big payouts, though somewhat less than the Hopkins settlement. The case of an endocrinologist in Connecticut who took nude pictures and abused a series of children, for example, was settled for about $50 million in 2012.

If the Hopkins settlement receives final approval by the Circuit Court for Baltimore City, each plaintiff will be reviewed individually to determine their share of the damages, including being interviewed and having their medical records examined.

As for the lawyer’s share, Mr. Schochor said that was up to the court to decide.