Her decision to delete the personal emails may reflect her experience as a polarizing figure who lived through the searing experience of her husband’s very public sexual affair with a White House intern. Now, as a likely presidential candidate, she opted to delete the private emails out of concern that they could leak and be used to embarrass her or undermine her candidacy.

“No one wants their personal emails made public, and I think most people understand that and respect that privacy,” Mrs. Clinton told reporters.

That may be. But historians, of course, perhaps after a grace period of some years, very much want to use personal emails and other private records to shed light on a public life.

“If she becomes president, we would eventually want to have all the intimate details of her life before the presidency,” said Robert Dallek, a prominent presidential historian. “It’s all part of the historical record.”

Mr. Dallek noted that many personal archives of public figures have been withheld from the public for many years after their deaths. But as long as the records are preserved, there is the possibility they will someday add to the understanding of history.

Photo

For example, in the late 1990s, Mr. Dallek became the first scholar to be given access to President John F. Kennedy’s medical records, which were controlled by a panel of three Kennedy associates who had rebuffed researchers for decades after his assassination. The historian’s discovery that Kennedy had more serious health problems than previously known, and had been treated with an extensive arsenal of drugs, made news around the world.

“It provided a new perspective on his life and his presidency,” said Mr. Dallek, who wrote about the records in his 2003 Kennedy biography.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

While most government email is now subject to preservation rules, personal email can be deleted with a couple of clicks. While letters may have ended up in a shoe box in the attic, email accounts can be lost when users switch Internet providers. But for Ms. Goodwin, the problem goes deeper than the loss of such records. It is the nature of the technology, which she says rarely provides the visceral intimacy of earlier records.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“What will be missing in the future is the best of the material we have today, which is handwritten letters and diaries,” she said.

Several of Lincoln’s associates kept meticulous diaries that were crucial in writing her 2005 book on Lincoln, Ms. Goodwin said. For “The Bully Pulpit,” her 2013 study of Theodore Roosevelt and William Howard Taft, their thousands of preserved letters, mixing family gossip and government business, gave an intimate account of what they did and how they felt about it, she said.

“You feel like you’re looking over their shoulder as they write,” Ms. Goodwin said. By comparison, she said, emails offer less depth and intimacy. “I would never write about a modern president,” she said.

But for some historians, such complaints overlook the fact that technology gives as well as takes. There are hundreds of hours of video and audio recordings of a public figure like Mrs. Clinton. She also joined Twitter in 2013 to great fanfare.

Some archivists, in fact, bemoan the overwhelming volume of material this era will bequeath. Larry Cebula, a digital archivist for the State of Washington who teaches history at Eastern Washington University, apologized in a semiserious blog post to historians of the next century for “all the stuff.” If Thomas Jefferson were alive, he wrote, he might be commenting on his friends’ Facebook pages and posting photographs to Instagram.

“I think historians a century from now will view this period as a time of an explosion of records,” Mr. Cebula said. “Even if Facebook is out of business, someone will have bought the archive.”

Of course, politicians are wary of some record-keeping. Mrs. Clinton may have deleted half of her emails, but her predecessor at the State Department, Condoleezza Rice, chose not to use email for work at all, partly out of concern that email mix-ups could lead to diplomatic misunderstandings, her aides say.

A revealing precedent is the tape recorder. Kennedy’s selective taping left an invaluable record of White House discussions during the Cuban missile crisis, and Lyndon B. Johnson recorded fascinating calls with many contemporaries, including the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. at the time of the civil rights marches in Selma, Ala.

But Richard M. Nixon’s tangle with taping, in which incriminating recordings during the Watergate scandal helped end his presidency, has left his successors disinclined to record. “I doubt that we’ll find recordings from the recent presidents,” Mr. Dallek said. “That’s a shame.”