I HAD heard stories of doctors disappearing — gone, suddenly, their offices closed and no forwarding address to be found — but I never expected it from my physician of 12 years. After weeks of phoning his office, I finally reached him. He referred to himself in the third person: Dr. J. was unavailable, the practice was closing and if I wanted my medical records, I should come fetch them.

This was a man who had peered into my nose and mouth, performed prostate examinations and talked me through afflictions. He knew I was married, had children, and what I did for a living. That he would skip town without notice seemed an abrupt ending. He didn’t even tell my health insurance provider that he had shut his doors.

When I arrived the next day, the doctor handed me my records and said he was closing the practice and moving it to Texas. He had not notified anyone because there were too many patients to contact, an explanation I accepted without contention, the way I had adopted so much of his advice over the years.

Everyone seems to have a health care provider they swear by — a dentist who can pull teeth without painkillers, a chiropractor who can realign spines one-handed. “My doctor is the best,” I’ve heard countless friends say. Rarely do they say “my doctor is the worst” — partly because people don’t usually stay with bad doctors very long, but also because bad doctors aren’t always obvious, at least until they do something obviously bad. Like, say, suddenly closing their practice and relocating 2,000 miles away.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In hindsight, there were signs I did not have the best practitioner. The nurses were fresh out of school, using my veins for target practice as they stabbed for blood. I was often prescribed serious medications for mild ailments. I was once left in an examination room for over an hour. When I emerged half-dressed in a cheap gown to check on the wait, a receptionist apologized, saying the doctor had left for the day. He had forgotten about me.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Doctors are a responsible lot, generally speaking, but sudden departures are not unheard-of. According to Lori Jenkins, a health care consultant in Clifton Park, N.Y., closing a practice without notifying patients is often a sign of business troubles, personal problems or impending malpractice suits. All the while, a patient might have no idea what lies behind the stethoscope. “You see things happening, but think it’s normal,” she explained.