Companies that violate those requirements could be subject to enforcement actions by the commission or by state attorneys general.

The administration’s proposal, considered a discussion draft, would need a congressional sponsor before it could be officially introduced. Already, though, industry analysts said that the proposal, along with several other legislative efforts on commercial privacy, was unlikely to be enacted in a Republican Congress.

The White House effort comes during heightened public awareness about both government and commercial data-mining. And the proposal drew sharp reactions.

Some prominent legislators and privacy law scholars said the administration’s effort failed to endow citizens with direct and clear legal rights to control who collects their information and how they use it. And the bill, they say, largely puts companies in charge of defining their own criteria for fair and unfair use of consumers’ personal details.

“Instead of codes of conduct developed by industries that have historically been opposed to strong privacy measures, we need uniform and legally enforceable rules that companies must abide by and consumers can rely upon,” Senator Edward J. Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat who has been investigating consumer-profiling companies called data brokers, said in a statement on Friday.

Companies like Acxiom, a database marketer in Little Rock, Ark., for instance, help marketers target individual consumers by estimated household income, ZIP code, race, ethnicity, social network or interests like “smoking/tobacco” or “gaming-casino.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Experian Marketing Services, another marketing company, uses data-mining to stratify consumers into socio-economic clusters with names like “small town, shallow pockets” and “diapers and debit cards.”

Armed with that kind of information, advertisers might, say, send smokers ads for the latest air filters. But in a report last year on data brokers, the Federal Trade Commission warned that such profiling could be also used in ways that could “adversely impact consumers.” Third parties, regulators wrote, could potentially use brokers’ information on smokers to decide whether someone was “a poor credit or insurance risk, or an unsuitable candidate for employment or admission to a university.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The report called on Congress to enact legislation to protect this kind of volatile information by, among other things, requiring companies that serve consumers to obtain consent from individuals before collecting such sensitive details about them.

While the White House’s proposal does not explicitly require companies to obtain affirmative consent to collect health information, it does call on companies to give individuals reasonable means to control the use of their personal data, depending on the context and “in proportion to the privacy risk.”

Microsoft heralded the draft bill as a welcome first step in improving consumer trust in how companies handled their information.

“The White House framework tackles issues that are crucial to build trust and foster innovation,” Brendon Lynch, chief privacy officer of Microsoft, wrote in a blog post on Friday. “Not all will agree with every aspect of the proposal — some will say it goes too far, while others will say it doesn’t go far enough — but it’s a good place to start the conversation.”

But some privacy advocates warned against the bill’s reliance on industry-developed codes of conduct. The process, they contended, would allow companies to define for themselves whether their data-use policies constituted privacy risks to consumers. They also said the bill offered companies loopholes that would help them avoid giving consumers meaningful control over their records and make it difficult for federal regulators to enforce the legislation.

“While it claims to provide rights to consumers, behind its flimsy policy curtain is a system that gives real control to the companies that now gather our information,” said Jeffrey Chester, executive director of the Center for Digital Democracy, a consumer advocacy group in Washington.

A few privacy law scholars said that the draft bill could undermine protections consumers already had. If enacted as currently written, for instance, it could pre-empt stronger laws in a few states that require companies to obtain consumers’ explicit consent before collecting unique biometric information like fingerprints or facial scans.

“It would override state statutes that give people more protection,” said Alvaro M. Bedoya, executive director of the Center on Privacy and Technology at Georgetown University Law Center. “It would be a significant setback for privacy.”