This relatively sanguine picture of the impact of data breaches is an example of a threat that looks worse than it turns out to be. The sheer size of hackings shocks and startles when the attacks are first reported, but it’s rare that journalists check on the actual consequences.

Moreover, consumer fears can be stoked by the incentives of the people providing the data. Many of the statistics on identity fraud and online attacks come from security firms that want more people to buy their services. It’s not so different from the soap company that advertises how many different types of bacteria are on a subway pole without mentioning how unlikely it is that any of those bacteria would make you sick.

One of the most memorable statistics on identity fraud comes from advertisements that say a new victim is created every two seconds. That figure, which comes from Javelin Strategy and Research, is largely attributable to standard credit card fraud, in which criminals use a stolen credit card number to buy goods — not the sort of thing most people imagine when they think of identity fraud. The more troubling identity theft, in which new accounts are opened in an unsuspecting person’s name, make up only 5 percent of the total figure given by Javelin.

These statistics do not mean that data security is not a real issue for authorities and consumers to think about. Even if the hackers don’t use your credit cards, there are instances in which leaked data of other kinds can be damaging in itself, as was clear in the recent episodes at Sony Pictures and Ashley Madison, the website that connects prospective adulterers. There are also serious geopolitical concerns about foreign hackers compromising national security if they get a hold of military maps or staff lists from the C.I.A.

Photo

For the companies and banks that bear the cost of stolen credit card numbers, the expenses are very real. Criminals racked up $7.8 billion in fraudulent purchases last year, with banks paying 62 percent of that amount and merchants the rest, according to The Nilson Report.

The banks, though, have managed to curtail their costs as they have devised new methods to detect fraudulent purchases. The most prevalent strategy involves looking for patterns in card purchases, but some banks have even taken to buying stolen cards on the black market to identify breaches, security experts say.

In the aftermath of the Target breach, in late 2013, the American Bankers Association said that the biggest expense for the banks was not the fraud but rather the cost of reissuing the cards and dealing with concerned customers.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

For JPMorgan, the costs after the 2014 intrusion were much more limited because the attackers took only email addresses and phone numbers, the type of information that is not hard to attain through other, legal channels.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Consumer advocates generally say that the most important thing to pay attention to after a data breach is the type of information stolen. Karen Barney, a program director at the Identity Theft Resource Center, said that to commit true identity theft, hackers generally need to get a hold of Social Security numbers.

“Social Security numbers are the be-all and end-all for successful attempts at identity theft,” Ms. Barney said.

While those nine-digit identifiers weren’t made vulnerable in any of the big data leaks at retailers, they were exposed in this month’s intrusion at U.C.L.A.’s health system and in the recent break-in at the federal government’s Office of Personnel Management.

To prevent fraud in the first place, banks are currently introducing cards with so-called E.M.V. chips, which make counterfeiting cards — currently the most prevalent sort of fraud — much more difficult.

Though serious identity theft has been on the decline in recent years, many security experts are expecting that to change as dedicated criminals, whose easy counterfeiting is foiled by E.M.V. chips, start to focus on getting Social Security numbers and other data that enables them to open new accounts, said Mr. Robertson, of The Nilson Report.

“For the bad guys, your five-year growth plan is not data breaches and stealing credit cards,” Mr. Robertson said. “It involves stealing all the info you can and opening legitimate accounts in people’s names.”

Ultimately, the problem will still require businesses, and individuals, to stop the thefts from happening in the first place.