The Houston Chronicle had done some nice coverage in the days and weeks after the shooting, focusing primarily on whether St. Joseph Medical Center — the largest in downtown Houston — would lose its federal funding.

My interest was broader and national: How often are hospital security personnel using Tasers and guns today? Have other patients been harmed? Who is providing hospital security? I know that hospitals can be dangerous places, but what do we know about whether those weapons make hospitals safer? So as the Pean family pondered its options, I did other reporting.

I called the organizations that accredit hospitals, government regulators, experts on health care security, and hospitals themselves and was surprised by what I found. There is no requirement that the shooting of a patient or the use of a Taser has to be reported, so there were almost no statistics — just some occasional mentions on police blotters and local news reports.

Researchers from Duke University and the University of Texas had recently completed the only national survey on how many hospitals armed security staff and found that about half said they did; this is almost double the number reported in smaller studies just three years before. (The Taser company has been marketing aggressively.)

When I started calling hospital systems to ask about security, the answers I got were all over the map. Some huge urban hospitals, like Bellevue in New York City, ban all weapons. Other tiny suburban hospitals use them. Many big hospital systems — like Johns Hopkins and Emory — refused even to tell me if their security guards were armed, saying it was sensitive information. (I admit I became obsessed: Every time I visited a hospital with a sick relative, I was staring at the security officers’ hips for telltale bulges.)

I also discovered that the training of hospital security officers was highly variable: One hospital that used Tasers did so only after putting in place rigorous guidelines as to when and how they could be used in a health care setting. They fired guards for inappropriate use. Other hospitals merely hired what one expert called “rent-a-cops,” who received little additional instruction about the fundamental difference between how to approach a street criminal and a sick patient.

Eventually, I interviewed Alan and, ultimately, met the entire Pean family, one Sunday morning at The New York Times, when they were in from Texas. A close-knit clan with Haitian and Mexican roots, the family is filled with professionals — doctors, nurses and teachers. They were articulate and thoughtful about how Alan’s harrowing brush with death had changed their worldviews.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It struck me that our readers should have an opportunity to hear directly from Alan and his family. I floated the idea with Catrin Einhorn, a wonderful Times multimedia journalist. We toyed with putting audio clips into the article, but decided that scattered sound bites wouldn’t do the story justice and so started thinking about a possible podcast. After getting the go-ahead from The Times, Catrin approached Ira Glass, the host of “This American Life,” who was enthusiastic about the possibilities. We felt confident that the more issue-oriented tone of a Times special report and the more personal/emotional tone of a “This American Life” podcast would be complementary rather than compete for readers’ attention.

Making sure the two pieces dovetailed with each other has been a fascinating, fun … and exhausting process. We hoped the audience would want both and invite you to let us know what you think.

In the end, the most difficult task was to get responses from the hospital or the police, which both basically went dark.

As you’ll hear in the “This American Life” piece, a crisis manager hired by the hospital told us that it would not answer questions. The police wouldn’t comment, citing an active internal investigation. We managed to get some records through Freedom of Information requests (but only a heavily redacted incident report). After months of legal argument, we got the hospital to release Alan’s 1,000-plus-page medical chart (with his permission, of course).

For me, the big question that remains is just how many patients are threatened or shot with Tasers or guns in hospitals today. Especially if there are no serious injuries, would we even know about it? The most vulnerable are patients with mental illness, who may not be aware of their rights or even what is happening. The Pean family, filled with doctors, knew where to complain. Others may not.

I asked Scott Martin, head of security at the University of California, Irvine, Medical Center, how often weapons are deployed in hospitals across the country. At his hospital, which has a Taser program, there is extensive training and officers must report each instance in which he or she displays or deploys a weapon. But others are not so rigorous. He said: “It’s hard to know. It’s like if a tree falls in the forest and there’s no one there to hear it, is there sound?”