Dr. Conway, 41, has a say in almost every significant or controversial health care policy change contemplated by the Obama administration.

He is devising a new way of paying doctors under Medicare, as required by a 2015 law, the biggest change in payment policy since 1992. He is responsible for deciding whether Medicare will pay for new items and services, like PET scans to help detect Alzheimer’s disease, or counseling patients about end-of-life care. He also leads efforts to measure the quality of care provided by doctors and hospitals, so the government can tie its payments to their performance.

And by using financial rewards and penalties, he is trying to nudge doctors and hospitals to provide better, safer, more coordinated care at a lower cost.

“Our fee-for-service system is broken,” Dr. Conway said. “It causes fragmented care. It pays not for outcomes but for outputs. It causes volume-driven care. So the question is, ‘How do we shift that payment model?’ ”

Dr. Conway said his experience at the children’s hospital here had contributed directly to changes in federal policy, including a new rule that expanded the role of dietitians. In addition, he said, “using electronic health records as a physician in practice has informed the way I think about policy, both what’s good and what needs to be improved” — to ensure that electronic records “do not disrupt the doctor-patient experience.”

Some experts say federal efforts to measure the quality of care, though well intentioned, are out of control.

Photo

“We need to stop excessive measurement,” said Dr. Donald M. Berwick, who headed the Medicare agency in 2010-11 and recruited Dr. Conway to be the chief medical officer. “I vote for a 50 percent reduction in all metrics currently being used.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The National Academy of Sciences has expressed concern about the proliferation of quality measures, including nearly 1,700 used by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

Many doctors doubt whether the government can reliably assess their performance. In the second round of incentive payments, announced this month, far more doctors received financial penalties than bonuses.

“It’s like a lottery,” said Anders M. Gilberg, senior vice president of the Medical Group Management Association, referring to the payments. His organization represents physician groups.

Despite skepticism or outright resistance from some health care providers, Dr. Conway exudes a boyish enthusiasm for his work.

He acknowledges that critics have a point. “We do want to focus on smaller sets of measures when possible,” he said. He promised that the government would concentrate more on the results of care, not just whether doctors gave the recommended tests and treatments.

Consumer advocates like Debra L. Ness, the president of the National Partnership for Women and Families, see Dr. Conway as a kindred spirit who understands what is important to patients. “He has the experience of being a clinician, a direct provider of health care services, but also has an incredible grasp of the administrative and policy aspects of health care,” Ms. Ness said.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Some of that insight comes from firsthand experience. Dr. Conway was expelled from the delivery room when his wife received an epidural injection while giving birth to their fourth child last year.

“C.M.S. says you have to leave the room,” said a nurse anesthetist, referring to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Dr. Conway complied with the request, he said, though he later checked and found that the agency had no such regulation.

Dr. Conway was the youngest of four children, and he realized that he liked working with children when he was a camp counselor in his teens. He received his bachelor’s degree at Texas A & M, where his father was a chemistry professor and his mother was an assistant dean at the business school. He went to Baylor College of Medicine and did his residency at Boston Children’s Hospital, where he met his wife, Heather, a pediatric intensive care nurse.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In 2007, during the Bush administration, he came to Washington as a White House fellow and worked for Michael O. Leavitt, who was then the secretary of health and human services.

Photo

“I have no idea whether Patrick is a Republican or a Democrat,” Mr. Leavitt said. “He came to government not for politics, but for policy.” Voter registration records list the doctor as unaffiliated with any political party.

When Dr. Conway speaks to groups of doctors or hospital executives, they often complain that federal rules are rigid and oppressive. But he has a way of disarming critics.

After one speech, he recalled, a doctor buttonholed him and said: “I always thought C.M.S. was evil. But you’re not evil. You seem very nice. I could work with you.”

His zeal to improve care is rooted in personal experience. He was frustrated, he said, at the fragmented care that his father, Dwight Conway, received when he was dying of cancer in 2007.

He promised his father that he would devote his life to trying to fix the health care system. His father told him: “You can’t. It’s too hard. But you are persistent. If anyone can, it would be you.”

Dr. Conway also supervises the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation, a test bed for new ways of financing and delivering care. In one such project, Medicare will make a “bundled payment” for hip and knee replacement surgery and 90 days of follow-up care, forcing hospitals to work more closely with doctors, nursing homes and home health agencies.

Federal officials are continually trying to measure the quality of care provided to Medicare beneficiaries, and Dr. Conway applies similar techniques to his personal life. He has a large whiteboard at work to keep track of office projects, and on one side is a mission statement he and his wife wrote, outlining objectives for family life, including ways to be a good father and husband.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“He evaluates his performance against those objectives,” said Wesley R. Perich, a former deputy in the office. Using one such metric, Dr. Conway said, he got home for dinner with his family about 75 percent of the time.

Some doctors worry that the administration is trying to do too much too fast, without considering the effects on patients.

“Dr. Conway is a very smart man, and he is trying lots of innovative programs and ideas,” said Dr. Thomas C. Barber, the chairman of the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons’ Council on Advocacy. “But some of those ideas are being implemented before they are ready.”

Among those providing unvarnished feedback to Dr. Conway is his sister, Dr. Kathleen C. Jurell, who specializes in physical medicine and rehabilitation.

“I hear from her about C.M.S.,” he said, “and it’s not always good.”