Ron Wyden, a Democratic senator from Oregon, has been a leading voice on the side of encryption and against giving the Justice Department more power to get consumer data from tech companies. Mr. Wyden, a member of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, recently talked to The New York Times about the privacy-versus-security debate. Cecilia Kang

Q. What is the state of encryption and other security debates on Capitol Hill?

A. This is going to be a big, big two months.

First, obviously, there are those who want to weaken encryption. They are still at it.

Then, the F.B.I. wants authority to circumvent court oversight to obtain Americans’ browsing histories. Third, there is what’s known as Rule 41, where the F.B.I. wants the authority to hack thousands or millions of hacking victims with one warrant from a single judge.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

These and other issues will come up right when we get back in session in November, after the election.

A draft proposal released in May by Senators Richard Burr of North Carolina and Dianne Feinstein of California to give law enforcement greater access to encrypted devices never caught on. What is the status of encryption proposals?

You’ll have to ask them, but if an anti-encryption bill gets out of the Intelligence Committee, which is where its strength is greatest, I will do everything I can to prevent that. If it goes to the floor, then I will filibuster. I will use every procedural tool to block legislation that in my view would make us less safe and jeopardize our liberty.

There seems to be no change in the standoff between companies that want strong personal privacy and security protections, and law enforcement, which argues that it needs to get past encryption for national security.

There were tens of thousands of news stories during the first days of the encryption discussion that said, “Today, in the ongoing debate between privacy and security, the following happened.”

I don’t think that’s the right way to think about it. I think it is about more security versus less security. If you want to be in a safe community, you shouldn’t be able to weaken encryption.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

We pushed back very, very hard on the idea that this is a battle between privacy and security.

Is this a minority point of view or are you seeing more people adopt this?

I think you are starting to see surprising voices in this discussion, like Mike McConnell, the former director of national intelligence, raise questions about what it means to weaken encryption.

What else is coming up for consideration in the cybersecurity space?

Browser spying. Senators John McCain and Richard Burr have a proposal to give any F.B.I. field office new authority to scoop up Americans’ browsing history and a slew of American digital records without going to a judge. Email, text message logs and certain location information would be included. We had a vote on this at the end of June.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Yet this would give law enforcement access to valuable information to aid in investigations.

My view is that if you know a person is visiting a website of a substance abuse group, a political organization or mental health clinic, then you know a lot about that person. It’s practically a window into their innermost thoughts. This should come with court oversight. The F.B.I. can already get this information with a court order today.

One thing that civil liberties groups have protested is what’s known as Rule 41. Can you explain what that is?

It would allow the government to hack into multiple devices with a single warrant from a single judge. The Justice Department will say this is a modest thing. But one tech person said this whole Rule 41 thing is coming forward under “cover of dullness.”

The F.B.I. says that the changes to Rule 41 are the best way for them to investigate cybercriminals, including child abusers. What’s your response?

Everyone believes that the F.B.I. should have the tools it needs to catch dangerous criminals. But too often over the past decade, intelligence and law enforcement agencies choose approaches that sweep up information from millions of innocent Americans instead of targeting terrorists and criminals. These approaches don’t make us safer.

The changes to Rule 41 allow the F.B.I. to hack millions of victims of cybercrime. These victims of hacks are regular people, not criminals.

This is a serious issue that the American people and their elected representatives should consider and debate, rather than allowing the Department of Justice to put into law through an obscure bureaucratic process. There would be overwhelming congressional support for something that gives the F.B.I. the tools it needs, while providing the American people the strong protections they deserve.

Is the encryption debate between tech companies and law enforcement unsolvable?

It will be a long debate. But look, it’s still possible to use metadata when the government thinks there is a problem. On the security side, we are no longer collecting millions of phone records on people, so that’s solid policy.

There is a way to address security while also addressing liberty: by emergency authority and focusing on people who are a threat.