Venture investment in the health business typically chases miracle cures and high-technology gadgets, like bioengineered drugs and new medical devices. They promise much but  cost a lot.
Dr. David J. Brailer, a former senior health official in the Bush administration, is starting a $700 million private equity fund, Health Evolution Partners, with a  different mission. “We’re going to be investing in things that can reduce the crushing costs of health care,” said Dr. Brailer, who was the administration’s national coordinator of health information technology.
At the outset, the sole investor will be Calpers, the California Public Employees’ Retirement System, the largest public pension fund in the United States with assets of $240 billion. Calpers funds form the basis for pension and health benefits for 1.5 million workers, retirees and their families.
So as Dr. Brailer’s equity fund pursues investments in cost-effective, high-quality health care, the impact on Calpers could extend beyond its balance sheet.
“Those businesses could meaningfully affect how you care for the insured,” said  Fred Cohen, a doctor and a partner at the Texas Pacific Group, a large private equity group. “Calpers and David Brailer have done a lot of thinking about how one does good and how one does well.”
Calpers, Dr. Cohen added, is “big enough to be able to use its financial resources to do clever things to try to change the health system.”
Health Evolution Partners, Dr. Brailer said, would look to invest in companies with new ideas in fields like remote monitoring of patients, the management of chronic diseases, telemedicine, predictive genomics to tailor drug doses and eBay-style Internet marketplaces for services like reading chest X-rays.
During his two years in the administration, which ended in May 2006, Dr. Brailer championed the adoption of electronic patient records to improve the quality of care and cut costs. But his investment firm, he said, has no plans to invest in electronic health records, which he termed a “saturated market.”
Today, Dr. Brailer said, the opportunity lies in linking health information technology to services. As an example, he mentioned the possibility of putting inexpensive remote sensors in the home of a person with early-stage Alzheimer’s disease, so a doctor or nurse could monitor the patient’s condition and activities. The patient, Dr. Brailer explained, could live more independently for a time and delay going into a nursing home, which can cost several thousand dollars a month.
Dr. Brailer said that he would not rule out an investment in a company offering technology or service to a hospital. “But mostly, we’re going to invest in things that keep people out of institutions,” he said.
The challenge to that investment strategy is that payment in America’s health care system is typically on a fee-for-service basis. So doctors, hospitals, clinics and drug companies are paid more for doing more — more tests, more surgeries, more pills.
Medical experts and economists have routinely criticized fee-for-service incentives for encouraging an unnecessary run-up in costs that can produce worse health outcomes. Dr. Brailer, who is both a medical doctor and an economist, calls it “high-volume, procedure-churn med- icine.”
He says that the system and its incentives are beginning to change, as insurers become convinced that preventive medicine, disease management and other long-term cost-cutting steps are both cost-effective and better medicine.
Health Evolution Partners, Dr. Brailer said, is the start of a 10-year strategy that assumes such approaches will increasingly move into the mainstream of health care.
Calpers will be the only investor for a year, with $500 million earmarked for direct investments and joint venture investments, and $200 million more for investments  in other health funds.
After a year, the fund will be open to other investors. “We want to create an ecosystem to help change health care,” Dr. Brailer said.
