WASHINGTON — Johns Hopkins University said Friday that it had programmed its computers  to ignore the word “abortion” in searches of a large, publicly financed database of information on reproductive health after federal officials  raised questions about two articles in the database. The dean of the Public Health School lifted the restrictions after learning of them.
A spokesman for the school, Timothy M. Parsons, said the restrictions were enforced starting in February.
Johns Hopkins manages the population database known as Popline with money from the Agency for International Development.
Popline is the world’s largest database on reproductive health, with more than 360,000 records and articles on family planning, fertility and sexually transmitted diseases.
Mr. Parsons said the development agency had expressed concern after finding “two articles about abortion advocacy” in the database. The articles, he said, did not fit database criteria and were removed.
Employees who manage the database instructed their computers to ignore the word “abortion” as a search term.
After learning of the restrictions on Friday, the dean, Dr. Michael J. Klag, said: “I could not disagree more strongly with this decision, and I have directed that the Popline administrators restore ‘abortion’ as a search term immediately. I will also launch an inquiry to determine why this change occurred.”
The school is named for Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg of New York, a Hopkins alumnus who has given millions of dollars to the university and the school.
Dr. Klag said the school was “dedicated to the advancement and dissemination of knowledge, and not its restriction.”
Ted Miller, a spokesman for Naral Pro-Choice America, an abortion rights group, said: “The public has a right to know why someone would censor relevant medical information. The Bush administration has politicized science as part of an ideological agenda. So it’s important to know if that occurred here.”
A woman answering telephones at the Agency for International Development said officials were not available because they were at a retreat.
Librarians at the Medical Center of the University of California, San Francisco, expressed concern about the restrictions this week after they had difficulty retrieving articles from Popline.
In an e-mail response on Tuesday, Johns Hopkins told the librarians that “abortion” was no longer a valid search term.
“We recently made all abortion terms stop words,” Debra L. Dickson, a Popline manager, wrote. “As a federally funded project, we decided this was best for now.”
Ms. Dickson suggested that instead of using “abortion,” librarians could use other terms like “fertility control, postconception” or “pregnancy, unwanted.”
Gail L. Sorrough,  director of medical library services at the medical center in San Francisco, said it was absurd to restrict searches using “a perfectly good noun such as ‘abortion.’ ”
Under the rule, Popline ignored the word “abortion,” just as it ignores terms like “a” and “the.” Ms. Sorrough and a colleague, Gloria Won, reported their experience on an electronic mailing list, and librarians protested the restrictions.
“We sent this out on a listserv, and it just exploded,” Ms. Sorrough said. “Eliminating this term essentially blocks access to reports in the database and ultimately to information about abortion. Unwanted pregnancy is not a synonym for abortion.”
Items on Popline include articles on “demand for abortion by unmarried teenagers” and federal judges’ abortion rulings.
