If health care reform falls apart again in Congress, the most likely cause will be failure to agree on how to subsidize coverage for tens of millions of uninsured Americans. The cost will almost certainly be at least $1 trillion over the next decade and perhaps much more, depending on how generous the reform might be.
President Obama is right to insist that reform be fully paid for over the next decade lest it drive up the federal deficit and lead to higher interest rates that might deepen the recession. That means either cutting spending or raising additional money.
Senator Charles Grassley of Iowa, the ranking Republican on the Senate Finance Committee, has decreed that reform must be financed entirely by savings or revenues within the health care system. He believes  that that would force greater efficiencies from a notoriously wasteful enterprise. Senator Max Baucus of Montana, the Democrat who is chairman of the committee, seems inclined to accept that notion to win Republican votes for a filibuster-proof majority.
Our preference would be to extract savings from the bloated, inefficient health care system — but also to raise revenues from a wider pool, preferably from well-to-do Americans who could be taxed more for a badly needed reform that would benefit all Americans.
The first task is to find savings. Some respected analysts suggest that as much as 30 percent of all health care spending in this country — some $700 billion a year — may be wasted on tests and treatments that do not improve the health of the recipients. If even half that money could be recaptured, the amount saved would be more than enough to finance health care reforms.
Overspending, however, permeates the system and would be devilishly difficult to eliminate in any systematic manner that reaped savings within the decade. Most of the truly “game-changing” innovations that could slow the rate of increase in health care costs — electronic medical records, research comparing the effectiveness of treatments, restructuring the way doctors organize themselves — will take years to affect costs and quality.
Still, it is important to push ahead quickly. Even if the benefits won’t show up for two or three decades, it is imperative to slow the rise in costs to a more affordable rate. And some respected analysts believe the big long-term reforms could yield some relatively quick savings.
Meanwhile, it will be important to get some guaranteed fast savings from the health care industries by cutting and reallocating hundreds of billions of dollars from projected spending on Medicare and Medicaid, as the Obama administration has proposed and Congress is considering. Just to be sure, Congress ought to establish a fail-safe mechanism that could impose additional cuts after a few years if savings are less than projected.
Even with all the cuts people are considering, new fees or taxes will almost certainly be necessary. Most health economists believe that the current tax exemption for employer-provided health benefits should be capped or eliminated. They say it is regressive and encourages generous policies that can lead to excessive use of medical care. A cap might make sense and would draw revenues from within the health care system. But surely it would be wise to cast a wider net — taxing products that are bad for one’s health, such as sugared drinks and alcohol, or limiting itemized deductions for wealthy Americans as Mr. Obama has suggested.
Any talk of new taxes provokes criticism and doubt that the nation can afford to reform the health care system in the midst of a deep recession. But the president is right, as he told a town hall meeting in Virginia recently, that “the costs of inaction, of not doing anything, are even greater.”
The nation can either make the hard choices needed to reform health care in the next decade or watch during that time as costs continue to soar, millions more people lose their health insurance and individuals and families face rising premiums and greater cost-sharing as employers shift more of the burden or drop their coverage.
