Manufacturers to Stop Using Controversial Chemical in Baby Bottles
The six largest makers of baby bottles will stop using bisphenol-A in their baby products after attorneys general of several states urged them to voluntarily quit, The San Francisco Chronicle reports. Playtex, Gerber, Evenflo, Avent America, Dr. Brown and Disney First Years said they would no longer rely on the controversial chemical, which mimics estrogen and has been under fire for a decade.
Physicians' Group Cancels White House Protest
A physicians' group pushing for a single-payer health plan canceled its planned protest outside the White House yesterday after its president was invited to attend the meeting, The Wall Street Journal reports. The group, Physicians for a National Health Program, represents some 15,000 doctors.
Device Makers to Clarify Consumer Advertising
Medical device makers say they will make direct-to-consumer ads easier to understand, but critics say the effort will not protect the public, Reuters reports. The Advanced Medical Technology Association released new guidelines Thursday saying ads for pacemakers, artificial hips and heart stents should be easy for consumers to understand, make clear when actors appear in them and not distract from their risks.
Google Permits Users to Share Medical Records
Google has added a new feature that lets patients share their electronic medical records with family members or care providers who may need to help out during an emergency, Agence France-Presse reports. The "share this profile" feature allows a few select people to view online medical records, but not to make any changes.
One in Five Soldiers to Have Served in Iraq and Afghanistan Suffered Brain Injuries
As many as 360,000 U.S. troops have suffered brain injuries, mostly concussions, representing about 20 percent of the 1.8 million who've served in Iraq and Afghanistan, Defense Department doctors said Wednesday, The Associated Press reports. While the overwhelming majority heal without treatment, up to 90,000 have suffer severe and lasting symptoms, said Brig. Gen. Loree Sutton, head of the Defense Centers for Excellence for Psychological Health and Traumatic Brain Injury.
