Two of the nation’s technology giants, General Electric and Intel, are joining forces to try to cash in on the trend of delivering more health care outside hospitals and doctors’ offices.
The companies, in a partnership announced on Thursday, plan to spend $250 million jointly in the next five years on research and development of health technologies to let doctors  remotely monitor, diagnose and consult with patients in their homes or assisted-living residences.
Both companies have fledgling offerings in the field of telehealth, as it is known,  and home health monitoring. Intel has just introduced  a special-purpose computer with two-way video capability, which is linked over the Internet to a doctor, nurse or physician assistant, called Intel Health Guide.
Under the partnership, General Electric, whose $17 billion-a-year health care business ranges from medical imaging equipment to electronic health records, agreed to distribute  Intel’s computer system through its worldwide sales force.
For the last few years G.E. has built a small business unit, GE QuietCare, which uses motion sensors to monitor older patients, mostly in communities for the elderly, so caregivers can be alerted to unusual patterns of activity, or inactivity, that might signal a health problem or emergency.
G.E. and Intel are pursuing what they expect to be a new multibillion-dollar market for using technology to automate and streamline the management of chronic conditions as populations age, both in the United States and in other nations.
A handful of chronic ailments, including heart disease, diabetes and hypertension, account for up to 80 percent of health care costs, according to medical experts, and 7 of 10 deaths in the United States.
Such chronic conditions, unless aggressively managed, worsen as people grow older. By 2030, about 71.5 million Americans will be 65 or older, the federal government estimates, up from 37 million in 2006.
The current market for telehealth and home health monitoring in North America and Europe is $3 billion, according to Data Monitor, a research firm, and is projected to rise to $7.7 billion by 2012. But much of remote monitoring today is done by nurses and physician assistants, who  call  patients with reminders and advice.
“Today’s systems just won’t scale,” said Louis J. Burns, general manager of Intel’s digital health group. “Health care has to go efficiently into the home, to enable elders to age in place with dignity.”
The early market for their high-tech remote monitoring systems, the companies’ executives say, will be integrated health providers in the United States and abroad, insurers and specialized disease-management companies.
Intel has sold systems to Advanced Warning Systems, a disease management company, and has pilot projects under way with several institutions ranging from the American insurer Aetna to a Scottish region of Britain’s National Health Service.
Managing chronic conditions is typically not reimbursed  in America’s fee-for-service system of health care, which pays for procedures, treatments and office visits but often not preventive care.
But there have been some Medicare pilot projects to pay providers based on improved health outcomes for patients, mainly those with chronic conditions. And the Obama administration has pledged to accelerate that drive, promoting electronic health records, for example, as a way to measure the quality of care and health outcomes.
Analysts and industry executives say the market for personal health care technology, like remote monitoring, could benefit considerably if reimbursement moves toward a pay-for-performance system.
“If nothing changes, this is going to be a big business because of the demographics,” said Jeffrey R. Immelt, the chief executive of G.E. “But the only way to really change health care is to have some metrics about outcomes and quality. And you need technology to do that.”
