The nation’s drive toward computerized medical records is getting a push from big hospitals, which hope not only to improve patient care but to gain an edge on competitors.
And an effort to be announced on Monday by a big New York regional hospital group may be the most ambitious effort of this type yet —  a sizable investment intended as a linchpin in the group’s $400 million commitment to digitize patient records throughout its system, including 13 hospitals.
North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System plans to offer its 7,000 affiliated doctors subsidies of up to $40,000 each over five years to adopt digital patient records. That would be in addition to federal support for computerizing patient records, which can total $44,000 per doctor over five years.
The federal program includes $19 billion in incentive payments to computerize patient records, as a way  to improve care and curb costs. And the government initiative has been getting reinforcement  from hospitals. Many are reaching out to their affiliated physicians — doctors with admitting privileges, though not employed by the hospital — offering technical help and some financial assistance to move from paper to electronic health records.
Efforts by hospital groups to assist affiliated doctors include projects at Memorial Hermann Healthcare System in Houston and Tufts Medical Center in Boston. But the size of the North Shore program appears to be in a class by itself, according to industry analysts and executives.
Big hospitals operators like North Shore, analysts say, want to use electronic health records that share data among doctors’ offices, labs and hospitals to coordinate patient care, reduce unnecessary tests and cut down on medical mistakes.
But hospitals are seeking a competitive edge, too. Digital links, analysts say,  can also tighten the bonds between doctors and the hospital groups that subsidize the computerized records. In most local markets, independent physicians typically have admitting privileges at more than one nearby hospital, and so hospitals compete for doctors as well as  patients.
“The North Shore-L.I.J. program is larger than other programs,” said Wes Rishel, a health technology expert at Gartner. “And it punctuates a trend of hospital groups trying to solidify and tighten relationships with physicians in their communities.”
In other words, the government-backed campaign to hasten the adoption of electronic health records has the potential not only to change how health care is delivered. It could also influence which institutions emerge as leaders in delivering care, as some  local markets consolidate further.
The North Shore program is to carry strong incentives to use the electronic-record technology to try improving the health outcomes for patients —  like managing diabetes, heart disease and other chronic conditions  — to reduce costly hospital admissions.
The subsidy will be 50 percent of the total cost for physicians who simply install electronic health records that can communicate between the doctor’s office, labs and hospitals.
But the subsidy will rise to 85 percent of the total costs of digital records for physicians who agree to share data —  stripped of personal identifiers —  on patient measures that include glucose levels for people with diabetes  and  post-operative procedures and prescriptions for heart patients. That could help North Shore amass an ever-growing database of evidence indicating which treatments and procedures yield the best medical results.
When there are evidence-based standards for the best care for patients with particular conditions, doctors should then adopt them, said Michael  Dowling, chief executive of North Shore, which operates 13 hospitals, 18 long-term care facilities, and dozens of outpatient centers and hospices on Long Island, Queens and Staten Island.
“We are going to change how we deliver care, and we should be held accountable for outcomes —  not just measured on the number of procedures performed,” Mr. Dowling said.
Indeed, the rationale for investing in digital records is that the technology can be used to help monitor and measure the results of care, providing the evidence needed to shift remuneration away from the current fee-for-service system, which encourages more tests, more procedures and more pills prescribed.
The North Shore initiative will begin with about 100 physicians, and then roll out more broadly. Dr. Randolph DiLorenzo, a family doctor in a three-physician practice in Syosset, N.Y., has signed up to join  the first wave. Like many doctors in small offices, he resisted embracing electronic health records until now, citing the cost and complexity.
But Dr. DiLorenzo, pointing to the North Shore and government incentives, as well as a long-term shift to evidence-based medicine and payment, said, “This is inevitable, and now is the time.”
Dr. DiLorenzo was also impressed by the technology, when representatives from North Shore and vendors working on the project gave him a demonstration in his office. The program will deploy tablet personal computers by Dell, and software by Allscripts, which can be retrieved by a doctor from devices including PCs, BlackBerrys and iPhones.
The North Shore move will be closely watched. “This is big enough and bold enough that hospital groups across the country will take notice and rethink their own plans,” said Glen E. Tullman, chief executive of Allscripts.
Still, to move so forcefully, analysts note, also carries risk for North Shore, if the expected payoff for physicians and the hospital group proves elusive. Mr. Dowling acknowledged that risk, but he added:  “This was not done on  a pure dollars-and-cents, return-on-investment perspective. But better health care and better quality should be a good investment.”
