In July, the San Francisco Department of Public Health started using an $11.2 million electronic medical records system, Avatar, that was designed to streamline billing and improve care for tens of thousands of clients. Thus far, however, it  has brought administrative chaos to the mental health and substance abuse services in the city.
Documents obtained by The Bay Citizen under a California Public Records Act request show that shortly after installing  Avatar, providers struggled to use the new software, causing health officials to lose track of millions of dollars of services.
Officials are scrambling to fill in the missing data to meet deadlines to qualify for reimbursement from the state.
The department has a $310 million budget for mental health and substance abuse, and  San Francisco General Hospital, city-run clinics, community organizations and private therapists provide the services. Medi-Cal reimburses the department  for some of those costs.
Problems related to the conversion to Avatar delayed for months the payment of about $450,000 to individual therapists, Anne Okubo, the health department’s deputy financial officer, told the San Francisco Health Commission on Tuesday night. The department was forced to use a third party to make the payments, which are still incomplete.
In addition, some therapists and social workers report that the demands of the new software have cut into the time they spend with patients, eroding the quality of care.
In an Aug. 19 e-mail headed “problems with Avatar,” Steven Schreibman, a social worker at Sunset Mental Health, a city-run clinic, wrote that the software required “excessive time charting and performing data entry” and had led to “shorter sessions with clients” and “delays in our capacity to accept new clients.”
Senior health department officials and Netsmart Technologies, Avatar’s developer, said the problems were glitches that were to be expected as the city made the transition to a more efficient record-keeping system.
“We knew it was going to be rough initially, because there is a learning curve,” said Jo Robinson, who heads the Community Health Behavioral Services division, where Avatar was introduced.
Kevin Scalia, a Netsmart Technologies executive vice president, said that he does not see this as a big problem. “From our point of view,” he said, “everything is going swimmingly.”
During the Health Commission meeting on Tuesday, health department officials accepted congratulations for putting Avatar in use on time without going over budget. The system, which encompasses billing and clinical documentation, has 2,600 users in San Francisco and is used in 25 of California’s 58 counties.
In San Francisco, Avatar replaced three software systems used by Community Health Behavioral Services, as well as paper charts.
Department managers told the Health Commission that Avatar would lead to “improved client care” and had “positive fiscal impacts,” but they acknowledged there had been problems.
In September, the department compared the cost of mental health and substance services reported by the hospital, clinics and organizations in March, before the software was put into use, to those reported in July using the new system.
The data showed that the mental health services reported had plunged 55 percent. Substance abuse services reported fell  32 percent. The large discrepancies caused alarm because they  indicated that providers were having problems using the software, according to documents and interviews.
“Substance abuse — serious problems!” Ms. Okubo, the deputy financial officer, wrote in a Sept. 1 e-mail to health department officials and Netsmart Technologies, which is based in New York. “Almost all providers with Avatar data have huge reductions in revenues. It’s pretty clear none are getting Avatar.”
A month later, as more providers gained access and proficiency with the software, the picture improved, but significant discrepancies remained.
“Everyone was learning, and we were fumbling,” said Ms. Robinson, director of Community Health Behavioral Services.
Gathering the correct data quickly is crucial for the city to be reimbursed by Medi-Cal. The department expects to receive $90.9 million from Medi-Cal this fiscal year for mental health and substance abuse. It  is racing to clean up the July data before deadlines in November and December to submit the correct information to the state for reimbursement.
Ms. Okubo is confident that will happen. “The expectation is that the system will be billing at the same rate,” she said.
But some organizations worry that the services they are providing will not be fully reflected in the new system.
At the Health Commission meeting, Estela Garcia, executive director of the Instituto Familiar de la Raza, a community organization that  provides mental health services, asked the commission to protect organizations like hers from any financial liability related to Avatar.
“I want a hold-harmless policy until the system is fully up and running,” Ms. Garcia  said.
How long that will take is unclear. One mental health program director, who would not allow his name to be used because it could jeopardize his relationship with the department, said his staff had gone to repeated training sessions to try to get up to speed.
“Avatar turns out to be a total disaster,” the program director said. “What is going to happen to contracted agencies if their billing is short at the end of the fiscal year as compared to the terms of their contract, because they can’t master Avatar?”
Some providers say the demands of the new system detract from the care they are able to provide.
A psychologist who works with a community organization under contract to the city, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was afraid of losing his job, said he used to do all his charting and billing on paper and was told that the new system would be more efficient. So far, that has not proved to be the case, he said.
“We are seeing the same number of patients,” he said, “but we are providing substantially less service to them, because the time we are now spending just to do the billing alone, not to mention the record keeping, it’s become the majority of our time.”
Greg Cross, a field representative for Service Employees International Union Local 1021, which represents hundreds of social workers, psychologists and counselors who work for the city, said he had met with officials to discuss Avatar’s impact on workload as well as performance expectations.
At the Health Commission meeting, Fred McGregor, the health department’s senior information technology manager for community programs, said  that the department was aware that providers find the demands of Avatar “a little onerous” and that it was working on a redesign to make clinical assessment more efficient.
Mr. Schreibman, the social worker, made it clear in his August e-mail that change was needed quickly.
“The kind and amount of work skill involved using this software represents a change in our job description,” he wrote. “This is not the job we accepted when we chose to do clinical work for the city.”
