For many years, service members who were leaving the military had to worry about whether their medical records would be properly transferred from one vast computer network in the Defense Department to another, in the Department of Veterans Affairs.
But now the two departments have agreed to develop a joint computerized system for health care records that could provide a single source of data on a veteran’s health from enlistment through death, officials from the departments said.
The move is one of several that suggest the two departments are moving closer to unifying parts of their sprawling health care systems, which handle more than 15 million active-duty troops, retirees, veterans and their families.
The agreement also comes in the wake of a February report by the Government Accountability Office that found the two departments were lagging in developing a shared system for electronic records.
That report said that both departments had spent billions upgrading their data systems in ways that did not improve coordination between their separate systems, and it recommended that they improve their “joint strategic planning.”
In a meeting on May 2, Robert M. Gates, the defense secretary, and Eric Shinseki, the secretary of veterans affairs, agreed to move ahead with developing the joint system, which had long been discussed but was the subject of some doubt until now, federal officials said.
Veterans say that under the current system, they sometimes have to carry paper copies of their health records from their military service to their new doctors at veterans hospitals. Some also complain that records transferred electronically get lost because the two computer systems are not always compatible.
“In future, that data will be completely interoperable,” Elizabeth A. McGrath, the deputy chief management officer for the Defense Department, said in an interview. “We are approaching the delivery of care in a standard way.”
Ms. McGrath said a shared system should speed care for veterans, since they will not have to obtain records from the Defense Department that might be missing in their Veterans Affairs Department record.
She also said it could make it easier for researchers and epidemiologists to spot health care trends, since data collected in one system can be more easily searched. Moreover, many health care problems facing veterans do not emerge until years after they leave military service, so being able to look at their entire medical history could be useful to researchers.
Officials in the Obama administration also hope that the joint system will save money, though they declined to estimate how much. “It will create efficiencies,” Ms. McGrath said.
Given the size of the undertaking, officials said it would take several years to complete. But a joint system is already under development in Chicago, where the Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs share a medical center, the Capt. James A. Lovell Federal Health Care Center.
Peter Gaytan, executive director of the American Legion in Washington, said that a joint health care system would reduce the time it takes for veterans to transition into the V.A. health system. Jim Strickland, a veterans advocate, said the lack of shared system meant that many doctors in the veterans health care system did not know details about the medical histories of veterans they treated, such as medications prescribed in Iraq or Afghanistan.
“That the V.A. physicians don’t have any access at all to the previous years of treatment records and notes by other doctors and caregivers is an absurd situation,” Mr. Strickland said. “The flow or continuum of good care is suddenly interrupted.”
Officials in both departments said they hoped to speed delivery of the new system, and reduce the cost, by requesting bids that involve commercially available software. They also said they are willing to allow different departments within their health care systems to develop distinct programs, provided they can all be accessed through a single system.
In a series of meetings this spring, Mr. Gates and Mr. Shinseki also discussed significantly speeding up the time it takes for people leaving the military to get exams that will determine their disability compensation.
In the past, people with injuries linked to their military service were examined by a military doctor and given a rating that would determine their disability benefits. Then they would receive another exam from a doctor in the veterans system — and often those two ratings were different. Beyond that, the armed services also used different criteria from one another in rating injured troops.
The two departments have begun standardizing their systems so that the Army uses the same criteria as the Navy and Air Force — and that all use the same system as the Department of Veterans Affairs.
That standardized evaluation system will be in place for the entire country by the end of the year, officials said. But it has not always speeded up the process, as some people must still wait 300 days or more for exams.
Mr. Gates and Mr. Shinseki have agreed they wanted to look for ways to shorten the process to as little as 75 days, a memorandum they signed said.
