Imagine that every car had a global positioning device and that before every trip, drivers were required to let the traffic authorities know where they were going. And suppose the government released all that data to the public so anyone could follow a car’s movements online simply by entering a license plate number.
Aircraft owners face an analogous situation. This month, the Federal Aviation Administration curtailed the little-known Block Aircraft Registration Request, or BARR, program, which allowed airplane owners to opt out of having their flight plans and en route data made publicly available, particularly to Web sites that offer free, real-time tracking.
Henceforth, the agency said, only aircraft owners who could provide “written certification of a valid security threat” would be able to block public release of their data.
“It’s totally nonsensical,” said Ed Bolen, president and chief executive of the National Business Aviation Association, which along with the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association and the American Civil Liberties Union oppose the F.A.A.’s action. “Just because the government collects data doesn’t mean it has to release it. What about income tax records and health information? They don’t release that.”
In announcing the F.A.A.’s planned change in policy, the transportation secretary, Ray LaHood, said in May that the action was in keeping with the Obama administration’s commitment to transparency in government. “Both general aviation and commercial aircraft use the public airspace and air traffic control facilities, and the public has a right to information about their activities,” he said.
Within airspace regulated by the F.A.A., large commercial aircraft as well as many general aviation airplanes have to operate under Instrument Flight Rules. These rules require filing a flight plan, which gives the plane’s registration number (its tail number), the departure location, destination and anticipated time en route. The plane is also required to have a transponder, an electronic device that communicates with ground radar to record location, speed and altitude.
So the F.A.A. is the repository of a wealth of flight data. And since 1997, the agency has made this information available free to Web sites like FlightAware.com and FlightView.com, which allow users to track flights if they know the plane’s tail number.
But privacy concerns prompted the F.A.A. in 2000 to collaborate with the National Business Aviation Administration to create the BARR program, which blocked the release of flight data if the owner requested it. About 7,400 of the 357,000 registered airplanes were blocked before the program was curtailed this month.
Now, only 970 aircraft meet the more stringent standard, which requires applicants to establish a valid security concern. The agency defines that as “a verifiable threat to person, property or company, including a threat of death, kidnapping or serious bodily harm against an individual, a recent history of violent terrorist activity in the geographic area in which the transportation is provided, or a threat against a company.”
Among the aircraft dropped from the blocked list is the Cessna Citation CJ3 owned by Boyd Bros. Transportation, based in Clayton, Ala. The company uses the jet to visit far-flung truck terminals as well as its customers. The company’s aviation manager, Eddie Yell, said executives had good reason to want to obscure where and when they fly.
“We’ve had cases of disgruntled truckers, so you don’t want to make yourself a target,” he said. “And we also do surprise inspections of our facilities that weren’t a surprise when our flight information was online. The employees would actually meet us at the airport.”
Moreover, he said, competitors could track the plane’s progress to learn targets of potential mergers and acquisitions.
John Hayes, 58, a retired optical engineer from Bend, Ore., who flies a Cessna Citation Mustang jet, was also upset that he could no longer participate in the BARR program. “I had this kooky guy posting on aviation Web forums that he was flying with me on actual trips I had taken and that I let him take the controls,” he said. “It creeped me out so I blocked my tail number.”
But other airplane owners said they did not understand the fuss. David Pomerance, 67, chief operating officer of Premier Aircraft Sales in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., flies a Mooney single-engine piston aircraft three to four times a week for business and pleasure. “I like that family, friends and customers can go online and know where I am and what time I’m arriving,” he said. “The only way it’d be a problem is if you’re running around on your wife or you want to hide personal use of business aircraft.”
That’s not how the A.C.L.U. sees it. “We believe the default should always be that your location remains private,” said Chris Calabrese, the A.C.L.U.’s privacy lobbyist.
Spurred by privacy advocates and outraged aviators, lawmakers have sent letters to Mr. LaHood expressing concerns about restricting the BARR program. And Representatives Sam Graves of Missouri and Leonard Boswell of Iowa, both pilots, have amended the long-stalled House F.A.A. reauthorization bill to allow any aircraft owner who asks to participate in the BARR program.
The National Business Aviation Association and the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association also jointly filed a petition in June asking the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit to overturn the F.A.A.’s decision to restrict access to the BARR program. This followed an unsuccessful attempt to get the court to suspend any changes to the program pending litigation or legislative action.
Marc Warren, acting chief counsel for the F.A.A., said case law was on the agency’s side. He cited a 2008 ruling by the District Court for the District of Columbia that allowed the release of a year’s worth of blocked aircraft data to the nonprofit investigative news organization ProPublica after it filed a Freedom of Information Act request. “That ruling made us cast a critical eye at the rationale for blocking tail numbers,” he said.
But Mr. Bolen at the National Business Aviation Association said that the ProPublica case was a singular event and that the court “was clear that its decision was in no way related to the real-time or near real-time release of data nor called for a change in the BARR program.”
A private pilot himself, Mr. Bolen added that he would not block the release of his flight information if he owned a plane. Still, he said, “I support the right of Americans to opt out of having their private movements broadcast on the Internet whether they are in an airplane, or a car, or just using a cellphone that receives a signal from the federal government’s G.P.S. system.”
