Give Massachusetts credit for setting audacious health care goals. It took the lead in guaranteeing near-universal health insurance coverage for its residents, providing a template for the federal reforms to follow.
Now a bill passed last week by the Legislature — and enthusiastically endorsed by Gov. Deval Patrick — aims to tackle the much harder problem of controlling health care costs. Massachusetts will be the first state to try to cap overall health care spending, both private and public, so that it will grow no faster than the state economy.
The state was able to reach near-universal coverage because the vast majority of its population was already covered by some form of insurance. It also could subsidize coverage for the uninsured using a big pool of money that had been used for charity care.
But when it comes to controlling health care costs, Massachusetts has no advantage, and in fact is starting behind most other states. Its costs are among the highest in the nation, and they have been growing in recent years at 6 percent to 7 percent while the economy has been growing at less than 4 percent. That bleak picture may be changing. The growth rate of health costs has slowed significantly over the past year or two, but nobody knows if this is a temporary or lasting change.
The new legislation sets a very ambitious target: to hold the annual increase in total health care spending to the rate of growth of the state’s gross domestic product for the first five years, through 2017, and then even lower for the next five years, to half a percentage point below the economy’s growth rate. The savings are projected to be as high as $200 billion over a 15-year period.
Setting goals is a necessary step, but there is skepticism among health care analysts that these targets could be met in such a short time given the lack of a strong enforcement mechanism in the legislation.
That does not mean the bill is completely toothless. It will establish a commission to monitor the growth in spending and require that health care providers or insurers explain themselves if their costs rise above the target growth rate. If there is no valid reason, the commission can demand that an organization submit a plan to bring its spending back in line. As a last resort, the commission can impose a $500,000 fine if it finds that the organization failed to make a good-faith effort. Many analysts expect the state will have to become increasingly aggressive in demanding cost cutting by providers and insurers if savings do not materialize.
The bill also contains other policy changes. It encourages more hospitals and doctors to set up “accountable care organizations” that would move away from traditional fee-for-service billing, which encourages needless tests and procedures. How successful those organizations will be at cutting costs is uncertain.
The law requires the state’s Medicaid program, state employee health care program and all other state-financed health care programs to adopt alternatives to fee-for-service payments, like paying a flat fee for all the care a patient will need over a year or bundling payments for doctors and hospitals to coordinate a patient’s care.
Other useful provisions include a requirement that health care providers report regularly on cost trends and quality measures, which should help patients shop comparatively; a new $60 million fund to invest in programs to reduce obesity, diabetes, asthma and other chronic diseases; $30 million to accelerate conversion to electronic health records; and malpractice reforms that could reduce litigation without imposing caps on damage awards.
Some critics worry that the state will not have the personnel and resources to do an effective job of enforcing these provisions. Others warn that the bill could impose burdensome regulations on health care providers and damage a cornerstone of the state’s economy.
Still, hospital and doctors’ groups have been supportive, and the bill was approved unanimously in the Senate and overwhelmingly in the Assembly. That may be a sign, some say, that the bill lacks the teeth needed to control the way providers set prices.
But don’t count Massachusetts out. It led the way in expanding coverage. What happens there on cost control will offer valuable lessons for the rest of the country.
