The Obama administration has issued a strong and much-needed warning to hospitals and doctors about the fraudulent use of electronic medical records to illegally inflate their billings to Medicare. Attorney General Eric Holder Jr. and the health and human services secretary, Kathleen Sebelius, cited “troubling indications” that some providers are billing for services never provided and vowed to prosecute. They sent a letter to five major hospital trade associations on Monday, two days after an article in The Times described in detail how greater use of electronic records might be making it easier for hospitals and doctors to submit erroneous payment claims.
A Times analysis of Medicare data compiled by the American Hospital Directory found that hospitals received $1 billion more in Medicare reimbursements in 2010 than they had in 2006, at least in part by changing the billing codes they assign to patients in emergency rooms.
The findings involved two kinds of potential abuses. One is “cloning,” in which a doctor cuts and pastes information from a patient’s electronic record to suggest that the services were performed again at the later date, or possibly uses the same documentation for other patients as well. The other is “upcoding,” in which hospitals may exaggerate the intensity of care provided or the severity of a patient’s condition to justify higher billings.
Similar abuses appear to be occurring in how doctors charge Medicare for office visits, according to regulators and a parallel investigation by the Center for Public Integrity, a nonprofit investigative news organization. There may be innocent explanations for some of these higher claims. Doctors may have underbilled in the past and now find it easier to meet billing and reporting requirements thanks to electronic records. In some hospitals, the patients may actually be sicker than in previous years.
But The Times’s reporters found disturbing evidence of sales pitches by software vendors telling doctors they could increase their incomes with the help of electronic records, huge error rates detected by contractors handling Medicare claims in Texas and Oklahoma, and a case where an emergency room doctor in Virginia billed Medicare for a complete physical exam, which was never done.
The administration is taking a properly forceful approach. It has stepped up its monitoring and prosecutions for fraud. It should also move more quickly to set up national guidelines on how to bill properly for services.
Electronic health records have great potential to track patient care and prevent costly duplicate services. It is important that they not be undermined by abuses during the phase-in period.
