Earlier this month, Apple made news with the introduction of Health, an iPhone app that will allow users to collect biometric information like heart rate and blood pressure and send it automatically to doctors or hospitals. The company also announced a partnership with Epic Systems, one of the largest suppliers of electronic medical record systems in the United States. This has led many to speculate that a new age is upon us, with patients having much greater access to health information, as well as the ability to share it with their doctors.
Let me be clear about one thing: I love information technology. I’m an early adopter of all kinds. I own an iPhone and many other Apple products. I have also received many grants and published many papers on the use of mobile technology for chronic disease management. I’m as pro-I.T. and pro-mobile technology as they come.
Yet I’m very skeptical we will see any great changes in the near future because of this development. A lack of true communication between information systems poses a huge challenge for these types of products. Although a law known as the Hitech Act, enacted as part of the stimulus package in 2009, encouraged hospitals and medical offices to start using electronic health records systems, it didn’t adequately address how to make different systems talk to each other. And so it’s common for practices, hospitals and emergency rooms to be unable to share data because they don’t use the same types of systems.
In addition, both Epic and Apple are known for being closed with respect to data access. That means patients who use these services would be forced to remain in those systems or face losing their data.
But the issues surrounding the technology pale in comparison with those surrounding people themselves. In 2009, Charles Friedman proposed a “fundamental theorem of biomedical informatics.” It stated that a human working with a resource like information technology is better than a human alone. But it also stated a corollary, that people are more important than technology. This is a key point. Real change happens when people change their behavior, not when new technology appears.
Let’s confront some of the issues on the patient side first. Not everyone wants to share daily data with physicians. Patients can be notoriously uncompliant with our recommendations. Take diabetes: Adherence to insulin regimens is “generally poor,” and not just because injecting insulin can be painful and, if done in public, uncomfortable for some.
I’ve studied this myself. We interviewed adolescents with diabetes, and their parents. Both groups were often skeptical about sharing too much information. No one likes to be nagged. In fact, one of our biggest concerns was that if technology caught patients not doing what they were supposed to, they’d stop using it.
We also need to be realistic about who is going to use this technology, and how much it can help them. Older patients, the very sick and the poor — those who need the most assistance — will probably be the least likely to do so, in part because they’re typically not heavy users of Apple products.
The biggest barrier, however, is physicians. No doctor, no matter how dedicated, wants to know every glucose value of every patient every day, or each patient’s daily weight or blood pressure measurement. Physicians barely have enough time to get their work done as it is. None of them could survive this information overload. Sometimes these individual data points aren’t even important, but when they are — for example, blood-sugar readings for diabetics — physicians might worry about being held liable for missing an abnormal reading. More than a third of physicians have reported personally missing test results that led to care delays for their patients because they are already overwhelmed by alerts and data.
An alternative solution, and one we attempted in our research, is to create systems in which patients’ data are monitored automatically to detect both good and bad outcomes. Then, physicians or their staff could be notified to contact patients if something goes awry.
This still creates a lot of work for offices and hospitals. Contacting patients can be hard and time-consuming. The results of our work were a modest success at best, and only with respect to short-term outcomes. It’s difficult for individual offices to create these systems, and there’s no reason to believe that if Apple or Epic did so that individual doctors’ offices would find them easy to use.
Moreover, doctors will not want to invest their time or money until a critical mass of patients demand it. They aren’t going to design systems for the small number of original users. Nor are they going to change the way their offices function for them. And until they do so, the early adopters will have no one using the large amounts of data they are collecting and sending.
It’s unbelievably hard to change physician behavior. It’s even harder to get them to use electronic health records and information technology. Before the Hitech Act, back in the “dark ages” of 2006, only 11 percent of office-based physicians had electronic health records that met criteria for a “basic system.” That number rose, after a lot of spending, to 48 percent of office-based physicians in 2013.
But that’s a “basic system,” not one that’s ready to accept data sharing from patients’ iPhones. Moreover, and this can’t be minimized, one of the most significant factors leading to physician dissatisfaction isn’t reduced salaries or malpractice — it’s interacting with an electronic health record. Doctors don’t like them, and they often have good reasons for feeling this way.
These systems often don’t work as advertised. They’re expensive. They can be difficult to use and maintain. They can interfere with clinical practice. They can increase inefficiency. They can even get in the way of a good doctor-patient relationship. Until these factors are fixed, the likelihood of a big expansion into iPhone Health sharing seems small, no matter how excited those promoting it may be.
“Shared information could revolutionize health care,” proclaimed a paper in Modern Healthcare. The abstract read: “Hospitals soon may learn the value of shared information technology. The idea of ‘community health information networks’ is picking up steam as payers and policymakers look for ways to control costs and measure the quality of care.” That paper was published in 1992. I’m still waiting.
