DALLAS —  Some nurses donned layer after layer of protective garb but unknowingly raised their risk of exposure to the Ebola virus when taking the gear off. Some wore gowns that left their necks uncovered and haphazardly applied surgical tape to the bare spots. And it was two days after the Ebola victim Thomas Eric Duncan was admitted before personnel began wearing biohazard suits.
For Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, the last two and a half weeks have been a nightmare without end. And with the announcement early Wednesday that a second nurse who cared for Mr. Duncan had been infected, scrutiny of the hospital intensified as officials sought to calm both workers and patients.
Long regarded as one of the finest hospitals in Texas, Presbyterian has faced continuing criticism — first for its initial misdiagnosis of Mr. Duncan, which delayed his care and placed others at risk; then for issuing contradictory statements about why its doctors did not suspect Ebola; and now for failures in safety protocol that led to the infections of two of its own. If the hospital has served as a canary in a coal mine for the country’s Ebola response, the results have not inspired confidence.
Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, who has received his own measure of criticism for the C.D.C.’s response, seemed to acknowledge as much on Wednesday when he described some of the hospital’s lapses. He also announced that the second nurse would be flown to Emory University Hospital in Atlanta, which has successfully treated two American Ebola patients in one of the country’s four special biocontainment units.
The C.D.C. flooded Presbyterian this week with teams of infection-control experts and crisis managers. “We’re working very closely with the hospital in Dallas to promote a safe environment for the care of everyone at that hospital, for the patients and for the workers,” Dr. Frieden said.
Until three weeks ago, few questioned Presbyterian’s status. With nearly 900 beds and 1,000 doctors, it is the eighth-largest hospital in Texas and has excelled in delivering both cardiac care and babies: more than 5,000 births a year. Regular evaluations by Medicare and the Joint Commission, which accredits hospitals, have largely been sterling.
Known here as Presby, it is the hospital of choice for some of the region’s richest and most prominent residents. The maternity wing is named for Margot Perot, the wife of the technology magnate and former presidential candidate Ross Perot. The board chairwoman at the hospital’s parent company, Texas Health Resources, is Anne T. Bass, the wife of the billionaire investor Robert M. Bass.
Its supporters question whether any hospital would have performed much better under similar circumstances: the unannounced arrival in its emergency room of the first Ebola case to be diagnosed in the United States. But local officials agree that Presbyterian’s reputation has taken a pounding, and that it will take time to repair it.
“I’m sure it has suffered,” said Judge Clay Jenkins, Dallas County’s top elected official. “It has had a great reputation as a great hospital.”
Things may get worse before they get better at the massive complex of blond brick buildings. Health care officials have started to express concern that the hospital’s staff, particularly its nurses, may stay away from their jobs, and the company has already had to recruit nurses and volunteers from other hospitals to meet heightened staffing demands. On Wednesday morning, the hospital’s gleaming hallways and teak-paneled waiting rooms were eerily quiet.
“It has always been considered the Neiman Marcus of hospitals, because a lot of wealthy people came here,” Suzanne Worthing said while waiting, virtually alone, for her husband to have an ultrasound. “Now we wonder if it’s going to become the J. C. Penney.”
Ms. Worthing said that one of her children had been delivered at Presbyterian, and that she and other family members saw doctors there regularly. But she acknowledged that she and her husband had thought twice about keeping Wednesday’s appointment.
“We thought about not having it done,” she said. “It’s the Ebola epicenter.”
There has been no comprehensive investigation to date of the hospital’s missteps, and health officials remain uncertain about precisely how the two young nurses, Nina Pham, 26, and Amber Joy Vinson, 29, were exposed. But the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and the Texas Department of State Health Services are evaluating the hospital’s performance.
Dr. Frieden said that workers had followed an evolving set of protocols to protect themselves in the first days after Mr. Duncan’s hospitalization. Some, he said, donned three or four layers of protective equipment and closed openings with tape in the belief that it would afford greater safety.
“In fact, by putting on more layers of gloves or other protective clothing, it becomes much harder to put them on, it becomes much harder to take them off, and the risk of contamination during the process of taking these gloves off is much higher,” he said.
Some nurses have said they received inadequate and ever-changing guidance on proper techniques.
Dr. Daniel Varga, the chief clinical officer at Texas Health Resources, said in an interview Wednesday that workers had not started wearing full biohazard suits until two days after Mr. Duncan was admitted, when tests confirmed that he had Ebola. He said that until then, the hospital had been following C.D.C. protocols to wear masks, gloves, gowns and shields.
Hospital officials have generally kept their remarks to a minimum, issuing brief statements and appearing at only a few of the nearly daily news conferences here. Some of their statements have included inaccurate dates for Mr. Duncan’s treatment. After first saying the hospital had failed to diagnose his Ebola infection on Sept. 25 because a doctor had not seen electronic medical records prepared by a nurse, officials later said that had not been the case.
On Friday, the hospital hired Burson-Marsteller, the global public relations firm, to help tell its side.
Speaking at the news conference where Ms. Vinson’s infection was announced, Dr. Varga acknowledged that the hospital had made mistakes.
“We’re a hospital that may have done things different with the benefit of what we know today,” he said. “But make no mistake: No one wants to get this right more than our hospital, the first to diagnose and treat this insidious disease.”
In a subsequent interview, Dr. Varga explained how the hospital believed Mr. Duncan, who died last week, had been misdiagnosed. He said a nurse had not asked Mr. Duncan about his travel history, a key element of Ebola screening, until two hours after he arrived in the emergency room. The nurse noted, he said, that Mr. Duncan had come from West Africa, but did not communicate that to the doctor who re-interviewed Mr. Duncan 10 minutes later. The doctor somehow came away with different information, that Mr. Duncan was a local resident. Dr. Varga said he did not know how that had happened.
“We didn’t correctly diagnose Mr. Duncan’s initial symptoms, and we’re sorry about that,” he said. “It wasn’t the outcome we were hoping for.”
Dr. Varga denied that the infection of a second nurse suggested that the hospital had a systemic problem.
“Let’s be clear,” he said. “We’re a hospital that serves this community incredibly well, and we have for nearly half a century.”
Presbyterian Hospital of Dallas opened as a faith-based nonprofit in 1966 in what were then sparsely populated northern suburbs. In 1997, Texas Health Resources was formed by merging the hospital with others in Fort Worth and Arlington. The hospital’s most recent tax filings, from 2012, show that it had $613 million in revenue and $1.1 billion in net assets. The hospital’s president at the time was paid $1.1 million.
In Medicare’s most recent ratings, the hospital scored well on surgery, obstetrics, and cardiac and stroke care. But it did less well, below state and national averages, on assessments of its emergency department. For instance, it took an average of 52 minutes for an emergency patient to be seen by a doctor or nurse, twice the state and national averages.
Court records also reveal several recent cases of bad outcomes in the emergency room. In 2012, for instance, one of the hospital’s own doctors, Rachel Dunagin, showed up at the emergency room with breathing problems. The lawsuit she later filed, which was dismissed after an out-of-court resolution, charged that a nurse had caused nerve damage and a permanent disability while inserting an IV line.
Another patient, Dwain Williams, said in a telephone interview that he had gone to the emergency room in July 2013 after coughing up blood. Records provided by Mr. Williams and evaluated by doctors consulted by The New York Times show that the hospital failed to determine that he had tuberculosis and sent him home with antibiotics, as was the case on Mr. Duncan’s first visit. Mr. Williams, who was insured by Medicare, received a correct diagnosis two weeks later in Los Angeles, but only after exposing family members and airplane passengers.
“It kind of felt like they were just rushing me in and out,” Mr. Williams said.
