DALLAS — Health officials said on Friday that they had identified 10 people who are most at risk of contracting Ebola after coming into contact with an infected African man now in isolation in a Dallas hospital.
Among them, health officials said, are the four people who shared an apartment with the patient, Thomas E. Duncan, and medical workers who treated him. Another 40 people are being monitored daily but are considered at relatively low risk, officials said. No one has developed any symptoms of the disease.
For those who have been exposed to the virus, there is nothing to do but wait.
“There really isn’t anything that can be done to prevent Ebola from developing if infection has occurred,” said Beth P. Bell, the director of the National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
While officials said the risk of the disease spreading widely were minimal, they warned that others might fall ill. “There certainly is a possibility that some of the people who have been in close contact with the patient might get sick with Ebola,” Dr. Bell said.
The first signs of the illness often appear within eight to 10 days, but can take as long as 21 days.
Mr. Duncan arrived in Dallas from Liberia on Sept. 20. Ebola cannot be spread until a person is symptomatic, and Mr. Duncan told doctors he first felt ill on Sept. 24. As he became sicker, the amount of virus in his system increased, and so did the risk of contagion.
Anyone who came into contact with him between Sept. 24 and Sept. 28, when he was placed in isolation at the hospital, is considered at risk of infection.
The four people who shared an apartment with Mr. Duncan before he was hospitalized remained in quarantine on Friday, and Texas officials apologized to them both for their failure to communicate and for not moving more quickly to have the apartment cleaned of possibly infectious materials.
After much delay, the cleanup began at the Ivy Apartments Friday afternoon as workers in yellow protective suits scoured the property, taking any item that might harbor the virus, which can survive outside the body for several hours on hard surfaces and for several days in pools of fluid. At least two of the contractor’s trucks were parked outside of Apartment 614, where Mr. Duncan had been staying. The green trucks were brightly painted and had advertising slogans on them, including “Cleaning Guys, Haz-Mat Clean-Up” and “The Annihilator.”
The top elected official in Dallas County, County Judge Clay Jenkins, said he visited the family on Thursday night to apologize. He said that they were understandably scared and confused, and that he hoped to find them more comfortable accommodations.
“I want to see them treated as I would want my own family treated,” Mr. Jenkins said.
The disease centers and the Department of Transportation have different protocols for handling medical waste associated with diseases such as Ebola, which led to a greater delay in getting the apartment cleaned.
Kasey Bonner, the coordinator for the Cleaning Guys, the company hired by C.D.C. to do the job, said its workers were not allowed to enter the apartment on Thursday night because the company did not have permission to transport hazardous material on Texas highways.
“We were contracted to clean and contain the affected material and anything that has come in contact with that patient,” Ms. Bonner said “There was no protocol put in place for handling Ebola on Texas highways.”
She said that the problem had been resolved and that they were in the process of cleaning the home.
The confusion was indicative of the myriad local, state and federal protocols and levels of preparedness that have raised questions about the ability of the nation’s health care infrastructure to handle an epidemic.
“There are many, many problems that have been revealed by this single case,” said Dr. Irwin Redlener, the director of the National center for Disaster Preparedness at Columbia University.
Among the mistakes was the failure in communication at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital when Mr. Duncan first arrived showing symptoms of Ebola on Sept. 25. While both Mr. Duncan and the person who brought him to the hospital told the nurse in the emergency room that he had been in Liberia, the center of the Ebola epidemic, that information was not relayed to the diagnostic team.
Without that crucial information, doctors sent Mr. Duncan home. He returned three days later, critically ill. He was then placed in isolation, where he remains in serious but stable condition.
In a statement released late Thursday, the hospital sought to explain early missteps and said it was going to integrate its electronic record keeping system to prevent such failures of communication.
“Protocols were followed by both the physician and the nurses,” the hospital said. “However, we have identified a flaw in the way the physician and nursing portions of our electronic health records interacted in this specific case. In our electronic health records, there are separate physician and nursing work flows.”
They promised to blend those work flows and said the system is being “modified to specifically reference Ebola-endemic regions in Africa.”
The effectiveness of the electronic record keeping system varies widely in hospitals and health care systems across the country, in part because the new systems are often layered on older systems and are not integrated. For instance, according to health experts, a hospital may create one electronic system for billing, another one for X-rays and lab tests and yet another for the diagnostic team. Some hospitals have been more aggressive than others in integrating these systems.
But Dr. Redlener said that anyone working in the hospital should have been aware that the information gathered by the nurse doing triage was not automatically relayed to the doctors. And, he said, given the numerous C.D.C. alerts about Ebola and the intense media coverage of the disease, hospital employees should have been especially alert to any symptomatic patient who had traveled recently from West Africa
“Right now,” he said, “with this unbelievable focus on Ebola, that someone would not get up and say, ‘I have a possible Ebola here’ — it is impossible for any hospital in the U.S. not to be acutely aware of Ebola and what needs to happen.”
