A new White House report on “big data” and privacy includes several recommendations that could help protect the personal information of individuals from warrantless searches and abusive marketing practices. But it still does not do enough to advance the goal President Obama set two years ago for “clear rules of the road” on privacy.
In January, Mr. Obama asked John Podesta, a senior adviser, to take on this issue. Like a previous report  on privacy published in 2012, the new one does a fine job of laying out some of the benefits and problems associated with the extensive collection and use of personal data by businesses and institutions. (The new report does not cover the activities of intelligence agencies.)
Mr. Podesta and his team note that such data can be incredibly useful. To take one example, careful analysis of the voluminous health records collected by hospitals and doctors’ offices could help identify the spread of infectious diseases. But the data can also be used by businesses to discriminate against certain groups, like the poor or minorities, by making it easy to avoid selling a product or service to some people or to charge them higher prices.
Some of the report’s recommendations are right on the mark. It proposes strengthening the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, which was passed in 1986, so that law enforcement agencies have to seek the same court approval to gain access to digital content like email that they need for physical information like letters. Currently, law enforcement agencies can obtain email messages from companies like Google without first obtaining a warrant from a court if those messages have been opened or if they have been on a computer server for more than 180 days. The report also recommends extending to foreigners the privacy protections that are afforded to Americans.
But other proposals could weaken privacy protections if the administration does not proceed carefully. For example, Mr. Podesta and his team want Congress to pass a law that would require companies to disclose publicly instances when personal information is stolen from their computer systems. But many consumer advocates are rightly worried that a poorly written federal law could pre-empt even stronger disclosure requirements enacted by some states like California.
Another recommendation, which is included in a technical analysis that accompanies Mr. Podesta’s report, argues that policy makers “should focus more on the actual uses of big data and less on its collection and analysis.” The problem with this idea is that consumers have the most control over their information when it is being collected. Once businesses have amassed the information, it can be hard, if not impossible, for individuals to know how it will be used in the future.
Most Americans think current laws are insufficient to protect their privacy, according to a Pew Research survey. Mr. Obama has previously said he feels the same way. The Podesta report offers some good recommendations that deserve enactment, even as the administration refines other proposals that still need work.
