WASHINGTON —  Eric Shinseki resigned as secretary of the Department of Veterans Affairs on Friday, leaving behind a sprawling bureaucracy embroiled in scandal and burdened with a decades-old legacy of overwhelmed facilities and management failures that his successor must now confront.
President Obama announced Mr. Shinseki’s departure after a 45-minute Oval Office meeting between the two men that ended a week of mounting demands from both parties for the secretary to step down. Mr. Obama, who appeared pained at the turn of events, hailed Mr. Shinseki as having an unquestioned commitment to the nation’s veterans, but he said the political storm had made Mr. Shinseki’s continuing leadership untenable.
“We don’t have time for distractions,” Mr. Obama said. “We need to fix the problem.”
Fixing the problem at the department now becomes an urgent political matter for the president, once again raising questions about whether the candidate who pledged in 2008 and 2012 to make government work efficiently has lost grasp of the government he now leads.
The department’s troubles, however, remain a far more serious concern for the millions of veterans whose access to timely health care has been steadily eroding as waves of wounded soldiers from Iraq and Afghanistan have converged with those who returned from earlier wars.
Most of the veterans now seeking treatment at department facilities are aging Vietnam-era service members, many with chronic illnesses like diabetes that require long-term care or with cancer and cardiovascular disease that require complicated and expensive treatment. Veterans of Iraq and Afghanistan are further straining the system with mental health problems like post-traumatic stress disorder.
Veterans’ demand for medical services is soaring. The number of outpatient visits to V.A. health care facilities has grown by 26 percent over the last five years, to 94.6 million in the current fiscal year, according to the department. Over the same period, the number of staff doctors and nurses has grown by 18 percent.
The effort to resolve the fundamental problems at the department will also play out in Congress, where Republicans say the problem is not a lack of money — the department’s $154 billion annual budget has more than doubled since 2006 — but rather inefficiencies in the delivery of care. Democrats say that the problem is a serious shortage of doctors and not enough hospitals.
“This is going to be a slow grind,” a senior administration official said of the need to overhaul the department. “A lot of the problems, they are not just systemic, but they are chronic. It’s like, roll up your sleeves, start digging into the culture and get rid of people who are impeding necessary change.”
“It won’t be pretty,” said the official, who asked for anonymity to be blunt about the challenge facing Mr. Obama in the months ahead.
One immediate question is whether the departure of Mr. Shinseki will have any real impact on the agency’s deep-seated problems. Mr. Shinseki apologized in a speech on Friday morning, before Mr. Obama accepted his resignation, saying that he was “too trusting” of some people working for him. He criticized a “systemic, totally unacceptable lack of integrity” at some veterans health care centers that he said he could not explain.
Defenders of Mr. Shinseki point out that problems at the Veterans Affairs Department, the country’s largest health care system, were far worse during the Vietnam era. Despite the current problems, many veterans say that the quality of care delivered — once they are able to get into the system — is much better today.
In addition, the veterans agency has a history of innovation in its health care programs, including advances in the treatment of spinal cord injuries, improvements in artificial limbs, increased use of electronic health records and the investigation of medical errors.
But the problems described Friday in an internal audit are remarkably similar to those documented six years ago in a report to the department by Booz Allen Hamilton, the management consulting company. The Booz Allen report found “chronic delays in care” at veterans hospitals and clinics, resulting in part from “the current shortage of nurses, nurse practitioners, primary care providers and specialty physicians.”
Mr. Shinseki had already been challenged by some of those problems during his five years at the department’s helm. A year ago, he and Mr. Obama had what aides described as a “come to Jesus” meeting in which the president demanded that Mr. Shinseki deal with a huge backlog of disability claims that were delaying benefits to veterans.
But the recent allegations that officials manipulated waiting lists for thousands of veterans across the country exposed even bigger issues. The department’s internal audit, which Mr. Shinseki presented to the president on Friday, attributed the scheduling scandal to the agency’s “overarching environment and culture which allowed this state of practice to take root.”
The audit said that the department’s culture “must be confronted head-on if it is to evolve to be more capable of adjusting systems, leadership and resources to meet the needs of veterans and families.”
The audit was unsparing in its documentation of the extent of problems. It found, for example, that at least one instance of reporting false patient wait-time data had occurred in nearly two-thirds of the department’s facilities. “Such practices are sufficiently pervasive to require V.A. to re-examine its entire performance management system,” the audit said.
The seeds of Mr. Shinseki’s departure may have been planted years ago, when he established standards that his supporters said were admirable but unrealistically high. He set 125 days as the goal for processing disability claims and was then blamed for the backlog that ensued. For new patients, he required that veterans be seen within two weeks.
In the audit, that 14-day standard was singled out as an “organizational leadership failure” and a major problem in providing timely care, second only to a shortage of doctors.
In announcing Mr. Shinseki’s departure, Mr. Obama said a number of department officials, including in Phoenix, the medical center that spawned the current scandal, would be fired. He also said that bonuses would not be paid to senior V.A. health care executives.
Now, the challenge for Mr. Obama will be finding someone who has the ability not just to lead a department with nearly 300,000 employees, but also steer it in a new direction. Mr. Obama said Friday that Sloan Gibson, Mr. Shinseki’s deputy and the president’s choice to be the acting secretary, will not lead the department over the long run.
“There is a need for a change in culture within the V.H.A.,” Mr. Obama said, referring to the Veterans Health Administration, “and perhaps the V.A. as a whole that makes sure that bad news gets surfaced quickly so that things can be fixed.”
Among the names mentioned as Mr. Shinseki’s possible successors by lawmakers and officials at veterans organizations are Dr. Kenneth W. Kizer, who was under secretary of Veterans Affairs from 1994 to 1999; Representative Tammy Duckworth, Democrat of Illinois, a veteran who served as assistant secretary at the department; Senator Jon Tester, Democrat of Montana; and Jim Webb, a veteran who was a Democratic senator from Virginia and a secretary of the Navy.
The president may also face a difficult time getting Congress to agree on legislation and financing to make the necessary changes. Democratic and Republican lawmakers have demonstrated vastly different visions for reforming the department.
Speaker John A. Boehner said Friday that “until the president outlines a vision and an effective plan for addressing the broad dysfunction at the V.A., today’s announcement really changes nothing.”
Republicans like Representative Jeff Miller of Florida, who is chairman of the House Veterans Affairs Committee, blamed how the department’s resources were divvied up for much of its problems. “The middle-management administrative functions have grown exponentially over the last few years,” Mr. Miller said.
Senator Bernard Sanders, a Vermont independent and chairman of the Senate Veterans Affairs Committee, said that although more accountability was needed, lack of resources was a major problem.
“I suspect very strongly there are parts of the country that we simply do not have the number of doctors and nurses we need, and those will cost money,” he said.
Part of the department’s problems stems from sheer size: Not only is it the nation’s largest health care system — with nine million enrolled veterans served at 150 medical centers and 800 outpatient clinics — it is among the largest workers’ compensation systems, charged with disbursing annual disability payments to nearly four million veterans.
In addition, many of the more recent patients are seeking treatment for profound injuries that would not have been survivable in earlier wars but are today, in part because of mandatory body armor and improvements in front-line medical care.
