This week, we reached the inevitable point in the controversy over the credit and debit card breaches where grim-faced retail executives from Target and Neiman Marcus, industry experts and consumer advocates turned up in Washington. They raised their hands and delivered well-rehearsed statements to our elected representatives.
It’s a familiar bit of theater, but their messages about the security of our personal data when we pay using plastic were startling.
“The innovations that are driving the industry forward and presenting consumers with exciting new methods of making purchases is also rapidly expanding beyond the bounds of our existing regulatory and consumer protection regimes,” went  the written testimony of James A. Reuter, speaking on behalf of the American Bankers Association. “And, as has historically been the case, the criminals are often one step ahead as the marketplace searches for consensus.”
William Noonan of the Secret Service echoed this sentiment in his testimony, noting the rapid increase in the number of criminals trying to acquire financial information and the sophistication of their methods. That gave Mallory Duncan of the National Retail Federation plenty of cover to declare outright, “Data breaches are a fact of life in the United States.”
This sounds a lot like resignation, though some of it is mere posturing as the various parties try to pass the buck and the bill for the damages. But if breaches are nearly inevitable for now, important questions arise: What are your odds of being swept up in all this, and how do you reduce them?
First, some numbers. If you want a good scare, take a look at the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse’s interactive chronology of United States data breaches.
A full search since the beginning of 2005 turns up 4,167 breaches that exposed 663,587,386 records of personal information. It is an incomplete list, perhaps by many millions, since thieves often extract information without victims ever knowing.
Nevertheless, January’s tally of instances in which data became vulnerable include the University of California, Davis health system, Snapchat, Coca-Cola, the message boards of the Straight Dope website, Skype, the Wichcraft sandwich chain, the federal Veterans Affairs Department and a county social worker in North Carolina who was supposed to be helping minors and disabled adults and instead stole personal information to aid an income tax fraud scheme. These are the facts of life to which Mr. Duncan referred.
Javelin Strategy and Research released the results of its annual survey of criminal activity this week and found 13.1 million victims in the United States of what it calls identity fraud, which it defines as any unauthorized use of personal information for financial gain. This can include a $3 credit card charge that you did not authorize, and as with any survey, it relies on the memories and interpretations of a diverse array of individuals.
The most eyebrow-raising numbers are the findings that 30.5 percent of people who were swept up in a breach of some sort in 2013 became victims of some kind of identity fraud. That is up from roughly 12 percent just three years ago, as criminals become better at stealing credit and debit card numbers and selling them quickly.
If those figures are right, does that mean that of the 40 million credit and debit card numbers thieves sucked from Target’s payments system, scofflaws will end up using more than 12 million of them successfully? Probably not.
As with any breach, the thieves may not put all the card numbers up for sale. Buyers may not buy all the ones on the market and may not use everything they buy. Then there is the publicity, vigilance and pre-emptively canceled cards that resulted from the large numbers of people involved. “For now, everyone is watching this like a hawk,” said Al Pascual, Javelin’s senior analyst of security, risk and fraud.
But let’s be real about the Target breach and similar ones where thieves get card numbers and, sometimes, email addresses. If you use a credit card to buy things, you’re hopefully reading your statement carefully at least once a month. If a rogue purchase shows up, you call the card issuer, the issuer removes the purchase and that’s usually the end of it. I often cross my fingers when this happens and keep the card, hoping to avoid the rigmarole of changing card numbers and resetting a bunch of automated monthly subscriptions and bills. Still, it’s maybe two hours of work if it comes to that.
Debit card users have bigger problems. Let’s assume that if the thieves did manage to get encrypted PINs from Target, they were unable to crack the code (and withdraw money from A.T.M.’s). Any ordinary debit card purchase sucks the money from the user’s checking account. Unless you’re looking at your balances each day, you may not notice the illicit purchase right away. Once notified, your bank may take days to investigate and put the money back. Automated mortgage payments and other bills may bounce, causing a host of hassles and potential dings on your credit report.
In a world of inevitable breaches, using a debit card for everyday purchases involves some risk. While it’s great for budgeting, users need to check the account activity daily. It’s also wise to have spare cash in a different account to draw on in case a big fraudulent charge leaves the other one temporarily short.
Thieves who have both card numbers and email addresses may try to send messages, pretending to be from the card company, in an attempt to phish for additional information. The note might instruct you to click a link, which may lead to malware on your computer that can extract usernames and passwords and other information. Or you could end up at a site that resembles your bank’s, where you may type in a bunch of personal data. If thieves can get your Social Security number, for instance, they may be able to open new accounts in your name.
Sadly, the default assumption these days has to be that every email asking for personal information — or really any electronic correspondence from a financial institution at all — is fake. That seems extreme, but all it means is that if any of the notes are sounding alarms about your account, type in the web address of the company and look up its call center number. That way, you can talk to a representative who can tell you if the email warnings are legitimate.
You think you would never fall for this, but people slip up. Verizon’s most recent annual fright show of a report on data breaches around the world attributes 29 percent of them to this sort of people-to-people breach, at least in part. There is a bit of bribery and extortion in this category, but 77 percent of the social breaches happen through phishing. And while the person responsible for clicking the wrong link is often unknown, seasoned executives and managers are at least partly to blame 27 percent of the time. They tend to be the primary targets, but it’s worth noting that cashiers, call center workers and guards are one of the links just 11 percent of the time.
I anticipate messing this up sooner or later, which is why I have a security freeze on my credit files. As a result, only companies that I currently do business with can get access to my credit reports. Given that most entities will not open a new account without a credit check, it is the best defense that exists against the most troublesome form of identity theft, in which thieves try to establish new accounts in someone else’s name. For a few bucks, I can temporarily lift the freeze when I want to apply for new lines of credit.
Leading a cash-only life is a theoretical possibility, but it boxes you out of most online shopping and makes traveling difficult. Going cash-only mostly means endless trips to the A.T.M. and all the fees and hassle that come with it.
So cards still offer more benefits than drawbacks for people who don’t get into debt, even if the gap between the two seems to be narrowing. With the right tactics, however, it’s easy enough for most people to greatly bolster their odds of avoiding the worst of the problems.
