You may have heard the term “medical home” to describe a way of organizing doctors’ practices to provide more comprehensive, less costly, patient-friendly treatment. Insurance companies often offer more money to practices that become recognized as medical homes, which use a team approach to coordinate care. States are even looking to medical homes to help save money in their Medicaid programs.
Now, a study of one large, long-running pilot of the medical home approach has found that it resulted in limited quality improvement, and that it didn’t save money, over a three-year period.
The report, by researchers at the RAND Corporation, a nonprofit research group, appears in the Feb. 26 issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association. The study evaluated the Southeastern Pennsylvania Chronic Care Initiative, one of the nation’s earliest and largest medical home pilots. The Commonwealth Fund and Aetna Inc. provided funding for the study.
The pilot included patients in 32 small- and medium-size primary care practices and four different health plans. Researchers compared them with patients in 29 other practices that did not participate in the pilot; over all, the study examined data from about 120,000 people.
The study found that the pilot practices successfully adopted medical home techniques, like creating lists of patients who were overdue for certain services, and received formal recognition as medical homes. The practices were recognized by the National Committee for Quality Assurance, which promotes medical homes as a path to better, less expensive care for patients. The N.C.Q.A. has designated more than 6,800 practices as medical homes — often, practices promote this recognition as a marketing tool.
The study found no reduction in patients’ use of emergency rooms or hospitals, however. Practices in the pilot did a better job of monitoring patients with diabetes for kidney disease, the study found, and quality improved for some other aspects of diabetes care, too. But the study found no improvements in other areas, like asthma care and cancer screening. Over all, it found improvements in just one of 11 quality measurements.
Dr. Mark W. Friedberg, a RAND researcher and the study’s lead author, said the results did not necessarily mean that the medical home concept was not beneficial. Rather, it suggests that meeting the concept’s dual goals of better quality and cost containment is challenging, and that the details of how the approach is executed matter. (Previous studies showing cost savings with medical homes have involved larger, integrated health systems, rather than pilots of smaller, independent medical practices.) “Expectations for medical homes are really high,” Dr. Friedberg said. “Right now, it’s a work in progress.”
He said the study was significant, however, because of its size, length of time and the number of health plans involved. He cited several factors that might help explain why the pilot did not show bigger improvements in quality and cost.
For instance, while the pilot emphasized quality of care for diabetes and asthma, participating practices did not have financial incentives to contain costs. And, while most of the practices in the pilot took new steps to improve quality, not as many increased the availability of night and weekend hours, which could have created savings by reducing unnecessary emergency room visits. (More than half the practices in the pilot offered extended hours, but the number of offices doing so did not increase significantly during the study period, Dr. Friedberg said.)
RAND and other researchers are also conducting studies of other medical home pilots, including those in other regions of Pennsylvania. Those studies may help shed more light on what factors make a medical home successful or not, he said. “We need to evaluate them,” he said, to help pinpoint what elements are essential, and refine the model.
Margaret E. O’Kane, president of the N.C.Q.A., said she found the study frustrating because it was based on standards in place in 2008, when the research began. Its medical home standards were updated in 2011, and the committee is about to adopt new standards for 2014 shortly, she said. One example of a change, she said, is that the standards now recommend focusing care management efforts on “high needs” patients rather than patients over all, to obtain the most “bang for the buck.” “The pace of health care research is grindingly slow,” she said. “It feels like being judged on old data.”
Here are some questions to consider about medical homes:
■ Where did the idea of making a doctor’s practice a “medical home” originate?
The notion of medical homes, also called “patient-centered medical homes,” first emerged as a way to manage the care of children with complex medical needs, but has since expanded to include all children and adults. It emphasizes a team approach to care coordinated by a primary care doctor with the help of technology like electronic medical records, and convenient access to care for patients, such as through expanded office hours.
■ Should I seek treatment from a practice that has been recognized as a medical home?
Ms. O’Kane said that in focus groups conducted in 2011, patients overwhelmingly reported a preference for treatment in medical homes: “It’s really great to have walk in and have the doctor know who you are, and coordinate your care,” she said. The RAND study did not look specifically at benefits from the patient’s perspective, in terms of cost. But for you as an individual, “there’s no downside, and potentially an upside,” Dr. Friedberg said. Since the study did find some improvements in quality of care, patients in Pennsylvania with diabetes, in particular, might benefit from seeking care at a participating practice.
■ Where can I find a practice that operates as a medical home?
The National Committee for Quality Assurance has a search tool on its website, recognition.ncqa.org, where you can find practices near you that have been recognized as meeting its criteria.
