Consumers’ first worry in a major security breach is usually about their financial and credit accounts. But cyberthieves can do some serious damage with medical information as well.
Anthem Health said this week that hackers obtained names, addresses, Social Security numbers, birthdays, email and employment information on up to 80 million current and former customers and Anthem employees. Although Anthem says the attackers did not get any medical records, they did get access to medical identification numbers found on insurance cards. Anthem offers several Blue Cross and Blue Shield insurance plans across the country.
“You don’t need a complete medical record to commit medical identity theft if you have the correct name and Social Security number,” said Pam Dixon, executive director of World Privacy Forum. “The chief harm for medical identity theft is that your medical record will change without your knowledge.”
And in this case, the hackers have enough information to do exactly that. Here’s what you need to know:
THEFT TYPES In large-scale breaches like the one at Anthem, experts said the criminals could pose as medical billers and fraudulently charge consumers’ insurance companies for medical services and drugs. Not only is your insurer paying for something that you didn’t ask for, but the fraudsters can also alter your medical record, Ms. Dixon said.
With an insurance ID number in hand, it can be easier for criminals to attempt to acquire medical records or insurance codes to help guide them on what to bill for, she explained. “Searches through the data for cancer survivors or even those in current cancer treatment would allow for fake billing to be piggybacked onto the real billing. This makes it extremely difficult for the health plan to detect the fake billing, and the thieves then will get a stream of payouts over time. It adds up to a lot of money quickly.”
Anthem has said that it does not believe medical information like insurance claims or test results were compromised. Hospital and doctor information is also believed to have been spared.
WHAT TO DO Consumers should try to create their own copy of their medical file so they have an accurate version of their history should a fraudster make any changes, said Ms. Dixon, who has worked with many medical identity theft victims. Think about any significant or chronic medical conditions, surgeries or accidents — particularly for the last few years — and get a record from your doctors’ offices, hospital or other provider. Also get a record of your blood type and any drug allergies. If you have access to an online patient portal, try to print out or save a copy of those files elsewhere.
“You want to print a baseline record so that if it is altered without your knowledge by fraudulent activity,” Ms. Dixon said, “you have something that is really clean.” That will help prove your case, she said, and rebuild an accurate history.
WHAT TO MONITOR If you have online access to any of your medical records through a patient portal, keep a watchful eye for any suspicious activity. And closely monitor your explanation of benefit statements to be sure they do not include any services you did not receive (and if you suspect you are not receiving your statements, report that to your insurer as well). Credit-monitoring services may help pick up medical debt collections in your name that you do not owe, and calls from collectors may be another warning signal.
Also remember this is a long-term crime. Fraudulent activity may not show up for six months to a year, experts said, so a heightened sense of awareness and vigilance needs to become routine.
WHAT’S HAPPENING NOW Scam artists have already started sending emails that appear to be from Anthem’s insurers in an attempt to trick people into sharing personal data. The company said there was no indication that the scams were being conducted by the same thieves who conducted the cyberattack.
Anthem said it would contact current and former members via mail delivered by the United States Postal Service about the breach with specifics on how to enroll in free credit monitoring and ID protection services, which will be provided for a year. It cautioned not to click on any links in emails that appear to be from the company, and said not to open attachments, reply to senders or supply any information.
Anthem created a website, www.AnthemFacts.com, and a toll-free number, 1-877-263-7995, to respond to questions.
