WASHINGTON — Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. used an email alias named for the Temptations, the Motown group. Lisa P. Jackson, a former Environmental Protection Agency administrator, used “Richard Windsor” — a combination of her dog’s name and a New Jersey town — for her electronic alter ego.
Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter keeps his personal and government emails separate on two different BlackBerrys. But two of his predecessors never used email for official business at all.
Members of President Obama’s cabinet have a wide variety of strategies, shortcuts and tricks for handling their email, and until three months ago there was no law setting out precisely what they had to do with it, and when. And while the majority of Obama administration officials use government email to conduct their business, there has never been any legal prohibition against using a personal account.
Hillary Rodham Clinton’s disclosure that she exclusively used a private email address while she was secretary of state and later deleted thousands of messages she deemed “personal” opens a big picture window into how vague federal email guidelines have been for the most senior government leaders.
Although the White House has strict requirements dating back two decades that every email must be saved, there is no such requirement for federal agencies. Instead they are in charge of setting their own policies for determining which emails constitute government records worthy of preservation and which ones may be discarded.
“It really is chaos across the government in terms of what agencies do, what individuals do, and people understand that they can decide what they save and what they don’t,” said Patrice McDermott, the director of the transparency watchdog group OpenTheGovernment.org. “If you leave it up to the agency, some are going to behave properly and take it seriously, and some are going to see it as carte blanche to whitewash the record.”
What is clear is that email poses a unique problem for government agencies, which are required under the law to preserve anything that relates to official business. “It doesn’t matter on what medium or in what form it occurs,” said Gary M. Stern, the general counsel for the National Archives and Records Administration, the agency in charge of preserving federal documents.
But, he said, “there’s such a challenge with email, because everyone gets a couple of hundred a day and nobody has the time to go through and say, ‘Is this a record, or is it not?’’’
While many agencies’ current practice is to print and file emails deemed worthy of saving, an Obama administration directive in 2012 mandates that agencies must devise a system for retaining and preserving email records electronically by the end of 2016.
Many agencies are playing catch-up to meet that deadline. Jen Psaki, a State Department spokeswoman, told reporters on Friday that the department started only last month to automatically archive senior officials’ emails.
Mr. Obama signed legislation late last year requiring government officials who use personal email addresses for official business to bring those records into the government within 20 days. Before that, the National Archives and Records Administration simply required those messages at some point to be provided to the government.
“The wiggle room for Mrs. Clinton is that those policies didn’t come into play until after she was gone” from the State Department in early 2013, said Thomas S. Blanton, the director of the National Security Archive at George Washington University, an independent, nongovernmental organization focused on transparency.
The vague federal guidelines on email have caused agencies, cabinet members and other senior officials to forge their own policies and practices, sometimes getting them into trouble.
Ms. Jackson’s use of “Richard Windsor” — her dog’s name was Ricky, and her husband and sons lived in East Windsor, N.J., when she was Mr. Obama’s first E.P.A. administrator — led Republicans on the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee to charge that she had created the alias to “hide” her actions, part of what they described in a September 2013 report as a pattern of “obfuscation” and a “culture of secrecy and evasion.”
Ms. Jackson said the alias was a matter of convenience and practicality, arguing that she had complied with requirements that any message relating to E.P.A. business would be captured on the agency’s system.
“You’ll find this with any cabinet head,” Tom Reynolds, an E.P.A. spokesman, said of generic government email addresses. “You just can’t use those because you’d just get inundated with emails. It’s not pragmatic.”
Gary Gensler, the former head of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, often used his personal email for official business, including messages related to the collapse of the investment firm MF Global in 2011. The agency’s inspector general later called the practice improper, even though the inspector general said there was “nothing that appeared corrupt” in Mr. Gensler’s use of his personal account.
Robert M. Gates, who was defense secretary to Mr. Obama as well as President George W. Bush, never even had a government email account, a former aide said. When Mr. Gates sent email, it was from his personal account, usually reserved for sharing jokes or making dinner plans, the aide added.
“He thought it was just cleaner to keep these things separate and distinct, and ultimately not to do anything over email” related to his job, said the aide, who was not authorized to detail Mr. Gates’s email habits.
Since 2012, the Defense Department has forbidden the routine use of personal email to conduct official business, according to Lt. Col. Thomas C. Crosson, a spokesman for the department.
But such policies still leave room for interpretation. The personal email addresses of top government officials are coveted information for journalists, lobbyists, activists and others, who often use them to communicate outside official channels to assure administration sources of confidentiality. In those cases, it is up to the official to decide whether to treat the email communications as records that must be retained for the government.
The Department of Health and Human Services, where Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell uses her government address for all official business, adopted a new email policy in December. The agency now automatically archives and saves the emails of all senior officials and political appointees, said Kevin Griffis, a spokesman for the department.
The White House adopted its strict email rules during the Clinton administration after a federal court determined that White House emails — until then considered the same as disposable sheets on a phone-message pad — should be treated as government records.
As part of a settlement in that case, a little-known staff secretary to President Bill Clinton drafted a memo laying out the new policy: Email had to be preserved and external networks should not be used because those messages would not be retained.
The aide’s name was John D. Podesta. “Podesta helped push the White House essentially into the digital age and created electronic archiving,” said Mr. Blanton, of the National Security Archive.
In January, Mr. Podesta left his post as a senior counselor to Mr. Obama. His anticipated new job: chairman of Mrs. Clinton’s expected presidential campaign.
