FOLSOM, Calif. — A huge project to modernize medical record-keeping for California prison inmates has more than doubled in cost from original estimates, to nearly $400 million in just three years, officials said.
The federal court-appointed receiver who controls California’s inmate health care system approved the project in 2013 to replace the state’s antiquated paper-based records with an electronic system that could track the medical and mental health care of nearly 130,000 inmates.
But a year of delays means it will not be installed in all 35 prisons until the end of 2017, and inmate advocates are so concerned about problems with the new system that they may seek to push it back even longer at some prisons.
The cost ballooned to $386.5 million from the original $182 million in part because the first estimate left out basics like the cost of maintaining the system and replacing worn-out equipment.
The receiver, J. Clark Kelso, said his office had also failed to anticipate needing $13 million worth of mobile devices: 16,800 laptops, dictation machines and other gear. Nor did it include the extra software required for things as fundamental as incorporating inmates’ requests to see doctors.
The authorities added dental records to the system last year, and the latest estimate includes three additional years of operation.
“We started out with as cheap a system as we thought we could use,” Mr. Kelso said, “and then, along the way, there were some things that we decided, ‘You know, we absolutely need these, it turns out.’”
The biggest problem was a pharmaceutical records system so complex that it turned out to be nearly unusable when it was tested last winter at three prisons, Mr. Kelso said. He brought in a new pharmacy chief in February and “told him his No. 1 job is to fix this.”
The drug-tracking system is working now, bringing benefits like automatically warning doctors when certain combinations of prescriptions could prove harmful, Mr. Kelso said.
Physicians do not like that the new system forces them to do time-consuming data entry that they used to delegate to nurses, he said, though he expects them to eventually adapt.
Doctors who tested the system are still seeing about one-third fewer patients a year later, potentially leading to backlogs and poor treatment, said Steven Fama, a lawyer at the nonprofit Prison Law Office, which sued to force health care improvements.
As a result, the lawyers are considering asking Mr. Kelso to delay installing the new system at as many as nine prisons next year.
Many of the extra costs have been absorbed in the receiver’s budget, which has nearly doubled to $1.9 billion since a federal judge seized control of California’s prison medical system a decade ago.
